--- PAGE 1 ---
K\Z_e`ZXcXe[=le[Xd\ekXcJkiXk\^`\j
kfGif]`k]ifdDXib\kDfm\j
B8K?PC@<E
;8PKI8;@E>
JN@E>KI8;@E>
k_\:LII<E:P
D8IB<K
:fdgc\k\cp
I\m`j\[
Lg[Xk\[
Director of Currency Research at GFT
SECOND EDITION


--- PAGE 2 ---


--- PAGE 3 ---
Day Trading
and Swing
Trading the
Currency
Market


--- PAGE 4 ---
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publish-
ing company in the United States. With ofﬁces in North America, Europe,
Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and market-
ing print and electronic products and services for our customers’ profes-
sional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Day Trading
and Swing
Trading the
Currency
Market
Second Edition
Technical and Fundamental
Strategies to Proﬁt from
Market Moves
KATHY LIEN
Director of Currency Research, GFT
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Copyright C⃝2009 by Kathy Lien. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Lien, Kathy, 1980–
Day trading and swing trading the currency market : technical and fundamental strategies
to proﬁt from market moves / Kathy Lien. – 2nd ed.
p. cm. – (Wiley trading series)
Rev. ed. of: Day trading the currency market. c2006.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-37736-9 (cloth)
1. Foreign exchange futures.
2. Foreign exchange market.
3. Speculation.
I. Lien,
Kathy, 1980–.
Day trading the currency market.
II. Title.
HG3853.L54
2009
332.4′5 – dc22
2008034576
Printed in the United States of America.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
xiii
CHAPTER 1
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing
Market of Our Time
1
CHAPTER 2
Historical Events in the FX Market
21
CHAPTER 3
What Moves the Currency Market in the
Long Term?
37
CHAPTER 4
What Moves the Market in the Short Term?
59
CHAPTER 5
What Are the Best Times to Trade for
Individual Currency Pairs?
67
CHAPTER 6
What Are Currency Correlations and How
Do Traders Use Them?
75
CHAPTER 7
Seasonality—How It Applies to the
FX Market
81
CHAPTER 8
Trade Parameters for Different Market
Conditions
91
CHAPTER 9
Technical Trading Strategies
109
CHAPTER 10
Fundamental Trading Strategies
165
v


--- PAGE 8 ---
vi
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 11
How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager 207
CHAPTER 12
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of
Major Currency Pairs
215
About the Author
273
Index
275


--- PAGE 9 ---
Preface
S
ince the ﬁrst edition of Day Trading the Currency Market, which
was published in 2005, the foreign exchange market has changed dra-
matically. The most notable change is the fact that daily average vol-
ume now exceeds $3 trillion, a 70 percent jump over the past three years.
As a direct result of this surge in interest, more participants have ﬂooded
the markets with different ways to trade currencies.
The popularity of the Day Trading the Currency Market book has en-
couraged me to give the second edition a twist—this time I have added
swing trading strategies!
After having taught seminars across the country on how to trade cur-
rencies, I have received a lot of good feedback about the book (thank you!),
and I hope that everyone will enjoy the new techniques in the second edi-
tion just as much as you have enjoyed the strategies and lessons in the ﬁrst!
The original book focuses heavily on fundamentals, but the new edi-
tion includes chapters on trading methodologies, statistical analysis, and,
of course, additional strategies.
I have also added comprehensive sections on how to trade like a hedge
fund manager and the impact of seasonality in the currency market.
If you are picking up a copy of Day Trading and Swing Trading the
Currency Market for the very ﬁrst time, you will not be disappointed. As a
trader ﬁrst and an analyst second, in this book I focus on what matters most
to currency traders. The ﬁrst edition has been one of the top resources for
those looking for a good primer on how the currency markets work—the
technical and fundamental drivers as well as actionable trading strategies.
There is something for everyone in this book, as it is designed for both
the beginner and the advanced trader. In this book, I try to accomplish two
major goals: to touch on the basics of the FX market and the currency char-
acteristics that all traders, particularly day traders, need to know, as well
as to give you practical strategies to start trading. Day Trading and Swing
Trading the Currency Market goes beyond what other currency trading
vii


--- PAGE 10 ---
viii
PREFACE
books cover and delves into such interesting topics as the top market-
moving indicators for the U.S. dollar and what currency correlations are
and how to use them. Here’s a brief road map to whet your appetite on the
topics covered in this book.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE—THE
FASTEST-GROWING MARKET OF OUR TIME
If you are wondering whether you should get into the FX market, take a
look at some of the reasons why the largest market in the world has al-
ways been the market of choice for the big players such as hedge funds
and institutional investors. Learn about why the FX market has exploded
over the past three years and the advantages that the FX spot market has
over the more traditional equities and futures markets—something that the
most seasoned traders of the world have known for decades.
HISTORICAL EVENTS IN THE FX MARKET
How can you trade the currency market without knowing some of the
major milestones that helped to shape the market into what it has be-
come today? There are countless events that are still talked about and
brought up despite the many years that have passed since they occurred.
This chapter covers Bretton Woods, the end of the Bretton Woods, the
Plaza Accord, George Soros and how he came to fame, the Asian ﬁnan-
cial crisis, the launch of the euro, and the bursting of the technology
bubble.
DIFFERENT WAYS TO TRADE
THE FX MARKET
Over the past few years, the FX market has evolved signiﬁcantly. Many
products have been introduced as alternative ways to invest in or trade
currencies. Foreign exchange spot is the oldest of these markets and rep-
resents the underlying asset for a lot of the new derivative products. Op-
tions, futures, and forwards are the next oldest, but forwards are generally
limited to a nonretail audience. An entire book can be dedicated to the dif-
ferences between all of the new derivative products, but for the purpose


--- PAGE 11 ---
Preface
ix
of this new edition, I provide some basic descriptions as well as general
advantages and disadvantages (there may be many others that are not in-
cluded in this new section).
HOW TO COPY OTHER PEOPLE'S SUCCESS
& BUILD YOUR PEOPLE BASED PORTFOLIO 
WHAT ARE THE BEST TIMES TO TRADE FOR
INDIVIDUAL CURRENCY PAIRS?
Timing is everything in currency trading. In order to devise an effective
and time-efﬁcient investment strategy, it is important to note the amount of
market activity around the clock in order to maximize the number of trad-
ing opportunities during a trader’s own market hours. This section outlines
the typical trading activity of major currency pairs in different time zones
to see when they are the most volatile.
WHAT ARE THE MOST MARKET-MOVING
ECONOMIC DATA?
For day traders, knowing which pieces of U.S. data move the market the
most can be extremely valuable. System traders need to know when it is
worthwhile to turn their systems off, while breakout traders will want to
know where to place their big bets based on what economic releases typ-
ically set off the largest movements. This section, with updated data, not
only ranks the importance of U.S. data, but it also reports on the knee-jerk
Would you like to save a lot of time, learn from Pros and see their strate-
gies? From now on, you can copy the best performing traders you like with 
a “click” of a button. Try out Social Trading, where everybody connects to 
trade and talk about the latest financial trends. Tap into the wisdom of the 
crowds as you learn and copy from other traders in the network. 
Social trading platforms have applied a "Facebook meets Twitter"- like 
approach in which users build communities to share and discuss trades, 
while sites rank top players and offer the chance to duplicate the trades of 
the most successful peers.


--- PAGE 12 ---
x
PREFACE
reaction in pip values and whether there is usually a follow-through over
the remainder of the day.
WHAT ARE CURRENCY CORRELATIONS AND
HOW DO TRADERS USE THEM?
Everything in the currency market is interrelated to some extent, and
knowing the direction and strength of the relationships between different
currency pairs can be an added advantage for all traders. When trading in
the FX market, one of the most important facts to remember in creating
a strategy is that no currency pair is isolated. Knowing how closely cor-
related the currency pairs are in your portfolio is a great way to measure
exposure and risk. Many traders may ﬁnd themselves thinking that they are
diversifying their portfolio by investing in different currency pairs, but few
realize that many pairs actually have a tendency to move in the same direc-
tion or opposite to each other historically. The correlations between pairs
can be strong or weak and last for weeks, months, or even years, which
makes learning how to use and calculate correlation extremely important.
New correlations have been added for this edition.
HOW TO TRADE LIKE A HEDGE
FUND MANAGER
This new chapter on how to trade like a hedge fund manager is really about
the steps to developing a successful trading strategy. Having worked with
many money managers and been involved in the process of launching
managed fund products, I have realized that all money managers work in
a similar way. Their strategies may be different, but the way they go about
developing these strategies is not. This section includes the ﬁve steps to
thinking and trading like a hedge fund manager.
SEASONALITY IN THE CURRENCY MARKET
Most traders attempt to analyze the future direction of currencies by using
either fundamental or technical analysis or, if they’re feeling particularly
crafty, a combination of both. However, many traders may not realize that
the clearest way to analyze past price behavior may be to look at price
activity itself, without the noise of indicators. One way to do this is through


--- PAGE 13 ---
Preface
xi
seasonality, which may be a concept familiar to many stock traders. This
new chapter discusses seasonality in the currency market.
TRADE PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT
MARKET CONDITIONS
The most important ﬁrst step for any trader, regardless of the market that
you are trading in, is to create a trading journal. However, the FX trading
journal is not just any trading journal. Aside from the typical listing of your
trade ideas and executed trades with targets and stops, the FX trading jour-
nal also teaches you how to create a currency pair checklist that takes ap-
proximately 10 minutes to ﬁll out and gives you a near-immediate insight
on the exact technical picture for each currency pair. Trading effectively
means having a game plan, and we systematically dissect a game plan for
you in this chapter, teaching you how to ﬁrst proﬁle a trading environment
and then know which indicators to apply for that trading environment.
TECHNICAL TRADING STRATEGIES
This is the meat of the book for advanced traders. This section covers some
of my favorite trading strategies for day and swing traders. Each strategy
comes with rules and examples. Three new strategies have been added to
this chapter, including how to trade news, how to effectively time mar-
ket turns, and how to capture a new shift in momentum. Many of these
strategies exploit speciﬁc characteristics of the FX market that have been
observed across time. There are strategies for all types of traders—range,
trend, and breakout.
FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGIES
The fundamental strategies chapter is more for medium-term swing traders
who go not for 15 to 20 points but for 150 to 200 points or more. This sec-
tion will teach you how to trade off commodity prices, ﬁxed income in-
struments, and option volatilities. It also covers intervention-based trades,
macro-event-driven trades, and the secret moneymaking strategies used
by hedge funds between 2002 and 2004, which is the leveraged carry
trade.


--- PAGE 14 ---
xii
PREFACE
PROFILES AND UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE MAJOR CURRENCY PAIRS
The ﬁnal chapter of this book is probably one of the most valuable. This up-
dated material goes over the unique characteristics of each major currency
pair: when they are most active, what drives their price action, and which
economic data releases are most important. A broad economic overview
and a look into each central bank’s monetary policy practices are given.
I hope you enjoy the book!


--- PAGE 15 ---
Acknowledgments
T
hank you to my wonderful team for their invaluable research and
support:
Boris Schlossberg
Richard Lee
Sam Shenker
Melissa Tuzzolo
Daniel Chen
Bosco Cheng
Jenny Tang
Vincent Ortiz
John Kicklighter
Ehren Goossens
And others:
Kristian Kerr
Randal Nishina
The Entire Staff at FXCM
xiii


--- PAGE 16 ---


--- PAGE 17 ---
C H A P T E R 1
Foreign
Exchange—The
Fastest-Growing
Market of
Our Time
T
he foreign exchange market is the generic term for the worldwide
institutions that exist to exchange or trade currencies. Foreign ex-
change is often referred to as “forex” or “FX.” The foreign exchange
market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market, which means that there is no
central exchange and clearinghouse where orders are matched. FX dealers
and market makers around the world are linked to each other around the
clock via telephone, computer, and fax, creating one cohesive market.
Over the past few years, currencies have become one of the most pop-
ular products to trade. No other market can claim a 71 percent surge in vol-
ume over a three-year time frame. According to the Triennial Central Bank
Survey of the foreign exchange market conducted by the Bank for Interna-
tional Settlements and published in October 2007, daily trading volume hit
a record of $3.2 trillion, up from $1.9 trillion in 2004. This is estimated to
be approximately 20 times larger than the daily trading volume of the New
York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq combined. Although there are many
reasons that can be used to explain this surge in activity, one of the most
interesting is that the timing of the surge in volume coincides fairly well
with the emergence of online currency trading for the individual investor.
EFFECTS OF CURRENCIES ON STOCKS
AND BONDS
It is not the advent of online currency trading alone that has helped to
increase the overall market’s volume. With the volatility in the currency
markets over the past few years, many traders are also becoming more
1


--- PAGE 18 ---
2
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
aware of the fact that currency movements also impact the stock and bond
markets. Therefore, if stocks, bonds, and commodities traders want to
make more educated trading decisions, it is important for them to follow
the currency markets as well. The following are some of the examples of
how currency movements impacted stock and bond market movements in
the past.
EUR/USD and Corporate Proﬁtability
For stock market traders, particularly those who invest in European cor-
porations that export a tremendous amount of goods to the United States,
monitoring exchange rates are essential to predicting earnings and cor-
porate proﬁtability. Since 2003, European manufacturers have complained
extensively about the rapid rise in the euro and the weakness in the U.S.
dollar. The main culprit for the dollar’s sell-off has been the country’s
rapidly growing trade and budget deﬁcits. This caused the EUR/USD (euro-
to-dollar) exchange rate to surge, which took a signiﬁcant toll on the prof-
itability of European corporations because a higher exchange rate makes
the goods of European exporters more expensive to U.S. consumers. In
2003, inadequate hedging shaved approximately 1 billion euros from Volk-
swagen’s proﬁts, while Dutch State Mines (DSM), a chemicals group,
warned that a 1 percent move in the EUR/USD rate would reduce prof-
its by between 7 million and 11 million euros. Unfortunately, inadequate
hedging is still a reality in Europe in 2008, which makes monitoring the
EUR/USD exchange rate even more important in forecasting the earnings
and proﬁtability of European exporters.
Nikkei and U.S. Dollar
Traders exposed to Japanese equities also need to be aware of the de-
velopments that are occurring in the U.S. dollar and how they affect the
Nikkei rally. Japan has recently come out of 10 years of stagnation. Dur-
ing this time, U.S. mutual funds and hedge funds were grossly under-
weight Japanese equities. When the economy began to rebound, these
funds rushed in to make changes to their portfolios for fear of missing
a great opportunity to take advantage of Japan’s recovery. Hedge funds
borrowed a lot of dollars in order to pay for increased exposure, but the
problem was that their borrowings are very sensitive to U.S. interest rates
and the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy tightening cycle. Increased bor-
rowing costs for the dollar could derail the Nikkei’s rally because higher
rates will raise the dollar’s ﬁnancing costs. Yet with the huge current ac-
count deﬁcit, the Fed might need to continue raising rates to increase the
attractiveness of dollar-denominated assets. Therefore, continual rate


--- PAGE 19 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
3
hikes coupled with slowing growth in Japan may make it less proﬁtable
for funds to be overleveraged and overly exposed to Japanese stocks. As a
result, how the U.S. dollar moves also plays a role in the future direction of
the Nikkei.
George Soros
In terms of bonds, one of the most talked-about men in the history of
the FX markets is George Soros. He is notorious for being “the man who
broke the Bank of England.” This is covered in more detail in our history
section (Chapter 2), but in a nutshell, in 1990 the U.K. decided to join the
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System in
order to take part in the low-inﬂationary yet stable economy generated
by the Germany’s central bank, which is also known as the Bundesbank.
This alliance tied the pound to the deutsche mark, which meant that the
U.K. was subject to the monetary policies enforced by the Bundesbank.
In the early 1990s, Germany aggressively increased interest rates to avoid
the inﬂationary effects related to German reuniﬁcation. However, national
pride and the commitment of ﬁxing exchange rates within the ERM
prevented the U.K. from devaluing the pound. On Wednesday, September
16, 1992, also known as Black Wednesday, George Soros leveraged the
entire value of his fund ($1 billion) and sold $10 billion worth of pounds
to bet against the Exchange Rate Mechanism. This essentially “broke” the
Bank of England and forced the devaluation of its currency. In a matter
of 24 hours, the British pound fell approximately 5 percent or 5,000 pips.
The Bank of England promised to raise rates in order to tempt speculators
to buy pounds. As a result, the bond markets also experienced tremen-
dous volatility, with the one-month U.K. London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) increasing 1 percent and then retracing the gain over the next
24 hours. If bond traders were completely oblivious to what was going
on in the currency markets, they probably would have found themselves
dumbstruck in the face of such a rapid gyration in yields.
COMPARING THE FX MARKET
WITH FUTURES AND EQUITIES
Traditionally FX has not been the most popular market to trade because
access to the foreign exchange market was primarily restricted to hedge
funds, Commodity Trading Advisors who manage large amounts of capital,
major corporations, and institutional investors due to regulation, capital
requirements, and technology. One of the primary reasons why the foreign
exchange market has traditionally been the market of choice for these large


--- PAGE 20 ---
4
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
players is because the risk that a trader takes is fully customizable. That is,
one trader could use a hundred times leverage while another may choose
to not be leveraged at all. However, in recent years many ﬁrms have opened
up the foreign exchange market to retail traders, providing leveraged trad-
ing as well as free instantaneous execution platforms, charts, and real-time
news. As a result, foreign exchange trading has surged in popularity, in-
creasing its attractiveness as an alternative asset class to trade.
Many equity and futures traders have begun to add currencies into the
mix of products that they trade or have even switched to trading currencies
exclusively. The reason why this trend is emerging is because these traders
are beginning to realize that there are many attractive attributes to trading
FX over equities or futures.
FX versus Equities
Here are some of the key attributes of trading spot foreign exchange com-
pared to the equities market.
FX Market Key Attributes
r Foreign exchange is the largest market in the world and has growing
liquidity.
r There is 24-hour around-the-clock trading.
r Traders can proﬁt in both bull and bear markets.
r There are no trading curbs.
r Instant executable trading platform minimizes slippage and errors.
r Even though higher leverage increases risk, many traders see trading
the FX market as getting more bang for the buck.
Equities Market Attributes
r There is decent market liquidity, but it depends mainly on the stock’s
daily volume.
r The market is available for trading only from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. New
York time with limited after-hours trading.
r The existence of exchange fees results in higher costs and commis-
sions.
r There is an uptick rule to short stocks, which many day traders ﬁnd
frustrating. Trading curbs may be frustrating for day traders as well.
r The number of steps involved in completing a trade increases slippage
and error.
The volume and liquidity present in the FX market, one of the most liq-
uid markets in the world, have allowed traders to access a 24-hour market


--- PAGE 21 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
5
with low transaction costs, high leverage, the ability to proﬁt in both bull
and bear markets, minimized error rates, limited slippage, and no trading
curbs or uptick rules. Traders can implement in the FX market the same
strategies that they use in analyzing the equity markets. For fundamental
traders, countries can be analyzed like stocks. For technical traders, the FX
market is perfect for technical analysis, since it is already the most com-
monly used analysis tool by professional traders. It is therefore important
to take a closer look at the individual attributes of the FX market to really
understand why this is such an attractive market to trade.
Around-the-Clock 24-Hour Market
One of the primary reasons why
the FX market is popular is because for active traders it is the ideal market
to trade. Its 24-hour nature offers traders instant access to the markets
at all hours of the day for immediate response to global developments.
This characteristic also gives traders the added ﬂexibility of determining
their trading day. Active day traders no longer have to wait for the equities
market to open at 9:30 a.m. New York time to begin trading. If there is a
signiﬁcant announcement or development either domestically or overseas
between 4:00 p.m. New York time and 9:30 a.m. New York time, most day
traders will have to wait for the exchanges to open at 9:30 a.m. to place
trades. By that time, in all likelihood, unless you have access to electronic
communication networks (ECNs) such as Instinet for premarket trading,
the market would have gapped up or gapped down against you. All of the
professionals would have already priced in the event before the average
trader can even access the market.
In addition, most people who want to trade also have a full-time job
during the day. The ability to trade after hours makes the FX market a much
more convenient market for all traders. Different times of the day will of-
fer different trading opportunities as the global ﬁnancial centers around
the world are all actively involved in foreign exchange. With the FX mar-
ket, trading after hours with a large online FX broker provides the same
liquidity and spread as at any other time of day.
As a guideline, at 5:00 p.m. Sunday, New York time, trading begins as
the markets open in Sydney, Australia. Then the Tokyo markets open at
7:00 p.m. New York time. Next, Singapore and Hong Kong open at 9:00 p.m.
EST, followed by the European markets in Frankfurt (2:00 a.m.) and then
London (3:00 a.m.). By 4:00 a.m. the European markets are in full swing,
and Asia has concluded its trading day. The U.S. markets open ﬁrst in New
York around 8:00 a.m. Monday as Europe winds down. By 5:00 p.m., Sydney
is set to reopen once again.
The most active trading hours are when the markets overlap; for exam-
ple, Asia and Europe trading overlaps between 2:00 a.m. and approximately
4:00 a.m., Europe and the United States overlap between 8:00 a.m. and


--- PAGE 22 ---
6
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
approximately 11:00 a.m., while the United States and Asia overlap be-
tween 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. During New York and London hours all
of the currency pairs trade actively, whereas during the Asian hours the
trading activity for pairs such as the GBP/JPY and AUD/JPY tend to peak.
Lower Transaction Costs
The existence of much lower transaction
costs also makes the FX market particularly attractive. In the equities mar-
ket, traders must pay a spread (i.e., the difference between the buy and sell
price) and/or a commission. With online equity brokers, commissions can
run upwards of $20 per trade. With positions of $100,000, average round-
trip commissions could be as high as $120. The over-the-counter structure
of the FX market eliminates exchange and clearing fees, which in turn low-
ers transaction costs. Costs are further reduced by the efﬁciencies created
by a purely electronic marketplace that allows clients to deal directly with
the market maker, eliminating both ticket costs and middlemen. Because
the currency market offers around-the-clock liquidity, traders receive tight
competitive spreads both intraday and at night. Equities traders are more
vulnerable to liquidity risk and typically receive wider dealing spreads, es-
pecially during after-hours trading.
Low transaction costs make online FX trading the best market to trade
for short-term traders. For an active equity trader who typically places 30
trades a day, at a $20 commission per trade you would have to pay up to
$600 in daily transaction costs. This is a signiﬁcant amount of money that
would deﬁnitely take a large cut out of proﬁts or deepen losses. The reason
why costs are so high is because there are several people involved in an
equity transaction. More speciﬁcally, for each trade there is a broker, the
exchange, and the specialist. All of these parties need to be paid, and their
payment comes in the form of commission and clearing fees. In the FX mar-
ket, because it is decentralized with no exchange or clearinghouse (every-
thing is taken care of by the market maker), these fees are not applicable.
Customizable Leverage
Even though many people realize that higher
leverage comes with risks, traders are humans and few of them ﬁnd it easy
to turn away the opportunity to trade on someone else’s money. The FX
market caters perfectly to these traders by offering the highest leverage
available for any market. Most online currency ﬁrms offer 100 times lever-
age on regular-sized accounts and up to 200 times leverage on the minia-
ture accounts. Compare that to the 2 times leverage offered to the average
equity investor and the 10 times capital that is typically offered to the pro-
fessional trader, and you can see why many traders have turned to the for-
eign exchange market. The margin deposit for leverage in the FX market
is not seen as a down payment on a purchase of equity, as many perceive
margins to be in the stock markets. Rather, the margin is a performance


--- PAGE 23 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
7
bond, or good faith deposit, to ensure against trading losses. This is very
useful to short-term day traders who need the enhancement in capital to
generate quick returns. Leverage is actually customizable, which means
that the more risk-averse investor who feels comfortable using only 10 or
20 times leverage or no leverage at all can elect to do so. However, lever-
age is really a double-edged sword. Without proper risk management a high
degree of leverage can lead to large losses as well.
Proﬁt in Both Bull and Bear Markets
In the FX market, proﬁt po-
tentials exist in both bull and bear markets. Since currency trading always
involves buying one currency and selling another, there is no structural
bias to the market. Therefore, if you are long one currency, you are also
short another. As a result, proﬁt potentials exist equally in both upward-
trending and downward-trending markets. This is different from the eq-
uities market, where most traders go long instead of short stocks, so the
general equity investment community tends to suffer in a bear market.
No Trading Curbs or Uptick Rule
The FX market is the largest
market in the world, forcing market makers to offer very competitive
prices. Unlike the equities market, there is never a time in the FX markets
when trading curbs would take effect and trading would be halted, only
to gap when reopened. This eliminates missed proﬁts due to archaic ex-
change regulations. In the FX market, traders would be able to place trades
24 hours a day with virtually no disruptions.
Online Trading Reduces Error Rates
In general, a shorter trade
process minimizes errors. Online currency trading is typically a three-step
process. A trader would place an order on the platform, the FX dealing
desk would automatically execute it electronically, and the order conﬁr-
mation would be posted or logged on the trader’s trading station. Typically,
these three steps would be completed in a matter of seconds. For an equi-
ties trade, on the other hand, there is generally a ﬁve-step process. The
client would call his or her broker to place an order, the broker sends the
order to the exchange ﬂoor, the specialist on the ﬂoor tries to match up
orders (the broker competes with other brokers to get the best ﬁll for the
client), the specialist executes the trade, and the client receives a conﬁr-
mation from the broker. As a result, in currency trades the elimination of a
middleman minimizes the error rates and increases the efﬁciency of each
transaction.
Limited Slippage
Unlike the equity markets, many online FX market
makers provide instantaneous execution from real-time, two-way quotes.
These quotes are the prices at which the ﬁrms are willing to buy or sell


--- PAGE 24 ---
8
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the quoted currency, rather than vague indications of where the market is
trading, which aren’t honored. Orders are executed and conﬁrmed within
seconds. Robust systems would never request the size of a trader’s poten-
tial order, or which side of the market he’s trading, before giving a bid/offer
quote. Inefﬁcient dealers determine whether the investor is a buyer or a
seller, and shade the price to increase their own proﬁt on the transaction.
The equity market typically operates under a “next best order” system,
under which you may not get executed at the price you wish, but rather at
the next best price available. For example, let’s say Microsoft is trading at
$52.50. If you enter a buy order at this price, by the time it reaches the spe-
cialist on the exchange ﬂoor the price may have risen to $53.25. In this case,
you will not get executed at $52.50; you will get executed at $53.25, which
is essentially a loss of three-quarters of a point. The price transparency
provided by some of the better market makers ensures that traders always
receive a fair price.
Perfect Market for Technical Analysis
For technical analysts, cur-
rencies rarely spend much time in tight trading ranges and have the ten-
dency to develop strong trends. Over 80 percent of volume is speculative
in nature, and as a result the market frequently overshoots and then cor-
rects itself. Technical analysis works well for the FX market and a tech-
nically trained trader can easily identify new trends and breakouts, which
provide multiple opportunities to enter and exit positions. Charts and in-
dicators are used by all professional FX traders, and candlestick charts
are available in most charting packages. In addition, the most commonly
used indicators—such as Fibonacci retracements, stochastics, moving av-
erage convergence/divergence (MACD), moving averages, (RSI), and sup-
port/resistance levels—have proven valid in many instances.
In the GBP/USD chart in Figure 1.1, it is clear that Fibonacci retrace-
ments, moving averages, and stochastics have at one point or another
given successful trading signals. For example, the 50 percent retracement
level has served as support for the GBP/USD throughout the month of
January and for a part of February 2005.The moving average crossovers of
the 10-day and 20-day simple moving averages also successfully forecasted
the sell-off in the GBP/USD on March 21, 2005. Equity traders who focus
on technical analysis have the easiest transition since they can implement
in the FX market the same technical strategies that they use in the equities
market.
Analyze Stocks Like Countries
Trading currencies is not difﬁcult for
fundamental traders, either. Countries can be analyzed just like stocks. For
example, if you analyze growth rates of stocks, you can use gross domes-
tic product (GDP) to analyze the growth rates of countries. If you analyze


--- PAGE 25 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
9
FIGURE 1.1
GBP/USD Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
inventory and production ratios, you can follow industrial production or
durable goods data. If you follow sales ﬁgures, you can analyze retail sales
data. As with a stock investment, it is better to invest in the currency of a
country that is growing faster and is in a better economic condition than
other countries. Currency prices reﬂect the balance of supply and demand
for currencies. Two of the primary factors affecting supply and demand of
currencies are interest rates and the overall strength of the economy. Eco-
nomic indicators such as GDP, foreign investment, and the trade balance
reﬂect the general health of an economy and are therefore responsible for
the underlying shifts in supply and demand for that currency. There is a
tremendous amount of data released at regular intervals, some of which is
more important than others. Data related to interest rates and international
trade is looked at the most closely.
If the market has uncertainty regarding interest rates, then any bit of
news relating to interest rates can directly affect the currency market. Tra-
ditionally, if a country raises its interest rate, the currency of that country
will strengthen in relation to other countries as investors shift assets to
that country to gain a higher return. Hikes in interest rates are generally
bad news for stock markets, however. Some investors will transfer money
out of a country’s stock market when interest rates are hiked, causing
the country’s currency to weaken. Determining which effect dominates
can be tricky, but generally there is a consensus beforehand as to what


--- PAGE 26 ---
10
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the interest rate move will do. Indicators that have the biggest impact on
interest rates are the producer price index (PPI), consumer price index
(CPI), and GDP. Generally the timing of interest rate moves is known in
advance. They take place after regularly scheduled meetings by the Bank
of England (BOE), the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed), the European Central
Bank (ECB), the Bank of Japan (BOJ), and other central banks.
The trade balance shows the net difference over a period of time be-
tween a nation’s exports and imports. When a country imports more than
it exports the trade balance will show a deﬁcit, which is generally consid-
ered unfavorable. For example, if U.S. dollars are sold for other domestic
national currencies (to pay for imports), the ﬂow of dollars outside the
country will depreciate the value of the dollar. Similarly, if trade ﬁgures
show an increase in exports, dollars will ﬂow into the United States and
appreciate the value of the dollar. From the standpoint of a national econ-
omy, a deﬁcit in and of itself is not necessarily a bad thing. If the deﬁcit is
greater than market expectations, however, then it will trigger a negative
price movement.
FX versus Futures
The FX market holds advantages over not only the equity market, but also
the futures market. Many futures traders have added currency spot trad-
ing to their portfolios. After recapping the key spot foreign exchange at-
tributes, we compare the futures attributes.
FX Market Key Attributes
r It is the largest market in the world and has growing liquidity.
r There is 24-hour around-the-clock trading.
r Traders can proﬁt in both bull and bear markets.
r Short selling is permitted without an uptick, and there are no trading
curbs.
r Instant executable trading platform minimizes slippage and errors.
r Even though higher leverage increases risk, many traders see trading
the FX market as getting more bang for the buck.
Futures Attributes
r Market liquidity is limited, depending on the month of the contract
traded.
r The presence of exchange fees results in more costs and commissions.
r Market hours for futures trading are much shorter than for spot FX
and are dependent on the product traded; each product may have


--- PAGE 27 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
11
different opening and closing hours, and there is limited after-hours
trading.
r Futures leverage is higher than leverage for equities, but still only a
fraction of the leverage offered in FX.
r There tend to be prolonged bear markets.
r Pit trading structure increases error and slippage.
Like they can in the equities market, traders can implement in the FX
market the same strategies that they use in analyzing the futures markets.
Most futures traders are technical traders, and as mentioned in the equi-
ties section, the FX market is perfect for technical analysis. In fact, it is
the most commonly used analysis tool by professional traders. Let’s take a
closer look at how the futures market stacks up against the FX market.
Comparing Market Hours and Liquidity
The volume traded in the
FX market is estimated to be more than ﬁve times that of the futures mar-
ket. The FX market is open for trading 24 hours a day, but the futures mar-
ket has confusing market hours that vary based on the product traded. For
example, trading gold futures is open only between 7:20 a.m. and 1:30 p.m.
on the New York Commodities Exchange (COMEX), whereas if you trade
crude oil futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange, trading is open
only between 8:30 a.m. and 2:10 p.m. These varying hours not only create
confusion, but also make it difﬁcult to act on breakthrough announcements
throughout the remainder of the day.
In addition, if you have a full-time job during the day and can trade
only after hours, futures would be a very inconvenient market product for
you to trade. You would basically be placing orders based on past prices
and not current market prices. This lack of transparency makes trading
very cumbersome. With the FX market, if you choose to trade after hours
through the right market makers, you can be assured that you would re-
ceive the same liquidity and spread as at any other time of day. In addition,
each time zone has its own unique news and developments that could move
speciﬁc currency pairs.
Low to Zero Transaction Costs
In the futures market, traders must
pay a spread and/or a commission. With futures brokers, average commis-
sions can run close to $160 per trade on positions of $100,000 or greater.
The over-the-counter structure of the FX market eliminates exchange and
clearing fees, which in turn lowers transaction costs. Costs are further
reduced by the efﬁciencies created by a purely electronic marketplace
that allows clients to deal directly with the market maker, eliminating
both ticket costs and middlemen. Because the currency market offers
around-the-clock liquidity, traders receive tight, competitive spreads both


--- PAGE 28 ---
12
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
intraday and at night. Futures traders are more vulnerable to liquidity risk
and typically receive wider dealing spreads, especially during after-hours
trading.
Low to zero transaction costs make online FX trading the best market
to trade for short-term traders. If you are an active futures trader who typi-
cally places 20 trades a day, at $100 commission per trade, you would have
to pay $2,000 in daily transaction costs. A typical futures trade involves a
broker, a Futures Commission Merchant (FCM) order desk, a clerk on the
exchange ﬂoor, a runner, and a pit trader. All of these parties need to be
paid, and their payment comes in the form of commission and clearing fees,
whereas the electronic nature of the FX market minimizes these costs.
No Limit Up or Down Rules/Proﬁt in Both Bull and Bear
Markets
There is no limit down or limit up rule in the FX market, un-
like the tight restriction on the futures market. For example, on the S&P
500 index futures, if the contract value falls more than 5 percent from the
previous day’s close, limit down rules will come in effect whereby on a
5 percent move the index is allowed to trade only at or above this level
for the next 10 minutes. For a 20 percent decline, trading would be com-
pletely halted. Due to the decentralized nature of the FX market, there are
no exchange-enforced restrictions on daily activity. In effect, this elimi-
nates missed proﬁts due to archaic exchange regulations.
Execution Quality and Speed/Low Error Rates
The futures mar-
ket is also known for inconsistent execution in terms of both pricing and
execution time. Every futures trader has at some point in time experienced
a half hour or so wait for a market order to be ﬁlled, only to then be exe-
cuted at a price that may be far away from where the market was trading
when the initial order was placed. Even with electronic trading and limited
guarantees of execution speed, the prices for ﬁlls on market orders are far
from certain. The reason for this inefﬁciency is the number of steps that are
involved in placing a futures trade. A futures trade is typically a seven-step
process:
1. The client calls his or her broker and places a trade (or places it
online).
2. The trading desk receives the order, processes it, and routes it to the
FCM order desk on the exchange ﬂoor.
3. The FCM order desk passes the order to the order clerk.
4. The order clerk hands the order to a runner or signals it to the pit.
5. The trading clerk goes to the pit to execute the trade.


--- PAGE 29 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
13
6. The trade conﬁrmation goes to the runner or is signaled to the order
clerk and processed by the FCM order desk.
7. The broker receives the trade conﬁrmation and passes it on to the
client.
An FX trade, in comparison, is typically only a three-step process. A
trader would place an order on the platform, the FX dealing desk would
automatically execute it electronically, and the order conﬁrmation would
be posted or logged on the trader’s trading station. The elimination of the
additional parties involved in a futures trade increases the speed of the FX
trade execution and decreases errors.
In addition, the futures market typically operates under a “next best
order” system, under which traders frequently do not get executed at the
initial market order price, but rather at the next best price available. For
example, let’s say a client is long ﬁve March Dow Jones futures contracts
at 8800 with a stop order at 8700; if the price falls to this level, the order
will most likely be executed at 8690. This 10-point difference would be at-
tributed to slippage, which is very common in the futures market.
On most FX trading stations, traders execute directly off of real-time
streaming prices. Barring any unforeseen circumstances, there is generally
no discrepancy between the displayed price and the execution price. This
holds true even during volatile times and fast-moving markets. In the
futures market, in contrast, execution is uncertain because all orders must
be done on the exchange, creating a situation where liquidity is limited
by the number of participants, which in turn limits quantities that can be
traded at a given price. Real-time streaming prices ensure that FX market
orders, stops, and limits are executed with minimal slippage and no
partial ﬁlls.
DIFFERENT WAYS TO TRADE FX
Over the past few years, the FX market has evolved signiﬁcantly. Many
products have been introduced as alternative ways to invest in or trade
currencies. Foreign exchange spot is the oldest of these markets and
represents the underlying for many of the new derivative products. Op-
tions, futures, and forwards are the next oldest, but forwards are generally
limited to a nonretail audience. An entire book can be dedicated to the dif-
ferences between all of the new derivative products, but for the purpose of
this book, here are some basic descriptions as well as general advantages
and disadvantages (there may be many others that are not included in
this list).


--- PAGE 30 ---
14
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Spot
The FX spot market is the largest market in the world with a daily turnover
of over $3 trillion.
Quoting Convention
Spot forex is quoted in pairs. If the EUR/USD ex-
change rate is 1.50, for example, it means that every euro buys 1.5 U.S.
dollars. A one-pip move represents a change in the last decimal place, and
for the EUR/USD it is worth $10 on a 100K lot.
Advantage
The biggest advantages of trading the spot market are its
simplicity, liquidity, tight spreads, and around-the-clock trading. There is
no expiration or time decay, and accounts can also be opened with very
small initial balances. Real-time charts, news, and research are provided
free by many brokers.
Disadvantage
The biggest disadvantage of the spot market is the fact
that it is an over-the-counter market, meaning that spot is not exchange
traded. Usually customers deal directly with their FX broker, who sources
their price feed from the interbank market. Unfortunately, not all brokers
are regulated, though this is expected to change in the coming years.
Additional Comment
A characteristic of the spot market that can be
looked at as both an advantage and a disadvantage is leverage, because
in the spot market leverage is very high. Some brokers offer as much as
400-to-1 leverage. Many people view the generous leverage in the FX spot
market as a beneﬁt, but leverage is a double-edged sword, meaning that it
exacerbates losses as well as gains. Too much leverage is also the primary
reason why many traders have difﬁculties turning a proﬁt. Traders have the
option to change their leverage, but they usually don’t.
Futures
FX futures were created by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) in
1972 and were the ﬁrst ﬁnancial futures contracts ever created. The daily
notional volume is approximately $60 billion.
Quoting Convention
Futures contracts are standardized and are sub-
ject to physical delivery. The prices of futures contracts are all quoted in
terms of U.S. dollars per unit of other currency being traded. For example,
the quotes would be given in U.S. dollars per euro or per Japanese yen.
Each tick or point equals 0.0001. Each contract for the euro, for example,
involves trading the value of 125,000 euros.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
15
Advantage
The biggest advantage of trading futures is the fact that the
transactions are conducted over an exchange. The market is very liquid
and is well regulated. As the counterparty to every trade, CME Clearing
eliminates the risk of credit default by any single counterparty. Price and
transaction information is readily available, and the top ﬁve bids and offers
can be seen by electronic traders.
Disadvantage
The contracts are standardized, which means that the
options are limited. Unless traders keep up with expiring contracts, they
are subject to physical delivery. Futures margins can be higher, which is
seen as a disadvantage by some traders, and account minimums are gener-
ally higher. Commissions and brokerage fees may also be higher.
Leverage is usually 5 to 1.
Options
There are many different ways to trade currency options. The Philadelphia
Stock Exchange, the International Securities Exchange (ISE), and the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange all offer options trading on currencies.
Quoting Convention
With currency options, quoting conventions vary
depending on where the option is traded. At the Philadelphia Stock
Exchange, for example, euro currency options are quoted in terms of
U.S. dollars per unit of underlying currency, and each contract is worth
10,000 euros. The point value is $100 (i.e., one full Eurocent = currency
value × 100). At the International Securities Exchange, FX options have
underlying values expressed in foreign currency units per U.S. dollar that
are modiﬁed to create an indexlike underlying. For example, if the cur-
rent exchange rate for USD/EUR is 0.7829, the underlying value for the
USD/EUR ISE FX option would be 78.29 (0.7829 × 100). This format is de-
signed to help investors easily adapt the trading strategies they currently
use for equity and index options. One point is equal $100. The Chicago Mer-
cantile Exchange, by contrast, offers options trading on futures contracts.
The trading unit is one CME futures contract (in euros, one contract =
125,000 euros), and the minimum tick size is 0.0001 per euro, which is the
equivalent point value of $12.50.
Advantage
Like futures contracts, options are exchange traded. They
allow for limited risk because the premium is the predetermined maximum
loss. They also are inherently leveraged products, which may be attractive
to some traders.


--- PAGE 32 ---
16
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Disadvantage
The biggest disadvantage of trading FX options is the
time decay. Also, there are limited trading hours for some of the different
currency option products.
Exchange-Traded Funds
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are the newest entries into the FX world,
with Rydex Investments launching its ﬁrst CurrencyShares in 2005. Power-
Shares have also entered the market, but only with DB U.S. Dollar Index
Bullish and Bearish funds. CurrencyShares are traded on the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) like any other exchange-listed security.
Quoting Convention
CurrencyShares are traded like any stock or tra-
ditional exchange traded fund on the NYSE Arca. Shares are traded in
one or more blocks of 50,000 shares. A share in the CurrencyShares Euro
ETF for example is the equivalent of 100 Euros. PowerShares on the other
hand usually represent a basket of currencies. The shares are traded on the
American Stock Exchange (AMEX).
Advantage
For many equity market traders, the biggest advantage of
trading Rydex’s CurrencyShares is their simplicity, because currencies are
traded in the same way as U.S. stocks and on the same exchange.
Disadvantage
The biggest disadvantage is that the CurrencyShares are
available for trading only until 4:15 p.m., and trading does not restart until
the NYSE opens the next day. Because the market closes, exchange-traded
currency funds cater primarily to long-term traders. Also, since they are
traded on the NYSE, they are subject to standard stock commissions and
they have expense ratios.
WHO ARE THE PLAYERS
IN THE FX MARKET?
Since the foreign exchange market is an over-the-counter (OTC) market
without a centralized exchange, competition between market makers pro-
hibits monopolistic pricing strategies. If one market maker attempts to
drastically skew the price, then traders simply have the option to ﬁnd an-
other market maker. Moreover, spreads are closely watched to ensure mar-
ket makers are not whimsically altering the cost of the trade. Many equity
markets, in contrast, operate in a completely different fashion; the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE), for instance, is the sole place where compa-
nies listed on the NYSE can have their stocks traded. Centralized markets
are operated by what are referred to as specialists, while market makers is


--- PAGE 33 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
17
the term used in reference to decentralized marketplaces. (See Figures 1.2
and 1.3.) Since the NYSE is a centralized market, a stock traded on the
NYSE can have only 1 bid/ask quote at all times. Decentralized markets,
such as foreign exchange, can have multiple market makers—all of whom
have the right to quote different prices. Let’s look at how both centralized
and decentralized markets operate.
Centralized Markets
By their very nature, centralized markets tend to be monopolistic: with
a single specialist controlling the market, prices can easily be skewed to
FIGURE 1.2
Centralized Market Structure
FIGURE 1.3
Decentralized Market Structure


--- PAGE 34 ---
18
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
accommodate the interests of the specialist, not those of the traders. If,
for example, the market is ﬁlled with sellers from whom the specialists
must buy but no prospective buyers on the other side, the specialists will
be forced to buy from the sellers and be unable to sell a commodity that is
being sold off and hence falling in value. In such a situation, the specialist
may simply widen the spread, thereby increasing the cost of the trade and
preventing additional participants from entering the market. Or specialists
can simply drastically alter the quotes they are offering, thus manipulating
the price to accommodate their own needs.
Hierarchy of Participants in
Decentralized Market
While the foreign exchange market is decentralized and hence employs
multiple market makers rather than a single specialist, participants in the
FX market are organized into a hierarchy; those with superior credit ac-
cess, volume transacted, and sophistication receive priority in the market.
At the top of the food chain is the interbank market, which trades
the highest volume per day in relatively few (mostly G-7) currencies. In
the interbank market, the largest banks can deal with each other directly,
via interbank brokers or through electronic brokering systems like Elec-
tronic Brokering Services (EBS) or Reuters. The interbank market is a
credit-approved system where banks trade based solely on the credit re-
lationships they have established with one another. All the banks can see
the rates everyone is dealing at; however, each bank must have a speciﬁc
credit relationship with another bank in order to trade at the rates being
offered. Other institutions such as online FX market makers, hedge funds,
and corporations must trade FX through commercial banks.
Many banks (small community banks, banks in emerging markets),
corporations, and institutional investors do not have access to these rates
because they have no established credit lines with big banks. This forces
small participants to deal through just one bank for their foreign exchange
needs, and often this means much less competitive rates for the partic-
ipants further down the participant hierarchy. Those receiving the least
competitive rates are customers of banks and exchange agencies.
Recently technology has broken down the barriers that used to stand
between the end users of foreign exchange services and the interbank mar-
ket. The online trading revolution opened its doors to retail clientele by
connecting market makers and market participants in an efﬁcient, low-
cost manner. In essence, the online trading platform serves as a gateway to
the liquid FX market. Average traders can now trade alongside the biggest
banks in the world, with similar pricing and execution. What used to be a
game dominated and controlled by the big boys is slowly becoming a level


--- PAGE 35 ---
Foreign Exchange—The Fastest-Growing Market of Our Time
19
playing ﬁeld where individuals can proﬁt and take advantage of the same
opportunities as big banks. FX is no longer an old boys club, which means
opportunity abounds for aspiring online currency traders.
Dealing Stations—Interbank Market
The majority of FX volume
is transacted primarily through the interbank market. The leading banks
of the world trade with each other electronically over two platforms—the
EBS and Reuters Dealing 3000-Spot Matching. Both platforms offer trading
in the major currency pairs; however, certain currency pairs are more liq-
uid and generally more frequently traded over either EBS or Reuters D3000.
These two companies are continually trying to capture each other’s market
shares, but as a guide, here is the breakdown of which currencies are most
liquid over the individual platforms:
EBS
Reuters
EUR/USD
GBP/USD
USD/JPY
EUR/GBP
EUR/JPY
USD/CAD
EUR/CHF
AUD/USD
USD/CHF
NZD/USD
Cross-currency pairs are generally not traded over either platform, but
instead are calculated based on the rates of the major currency pairs and
then offset using the “legs.” For example, if an interbank trader had a
client who wanted to go long AUD/JPY, the trader would most likely buy
AUD/USD over the Reuters D3000 system and buy USD/JPY over EBS. The
trader would then multiply these rates and provide the client with the re-
spective AUD/JPY rate. These currency pairs are also known as synthetic
currencies, and this helps to explain why spreads for cross currencies are
generally wider than spreads for the major currency pairs.


--- PAGE 36 ---


--- PAGE 37 ---
C H A P T E R 2
Historical Events
in the
FX Market
B
efore diving into the inner workings of currency trading, it is impor-
tant for every trader to understand a few of the key milestones in the
foreign exchange market, since even to this day they still represent
events that are referenced repeatedly by professional forex traders.
BRETTON WOODS: ANOINTING
THE DOLLAR AS THE WORLD
CURRENCY (1944)
In July 1944, representatives of 44 nations met in Bretton Woods, New
Hampshire, to create a new institutional arrangement for governing the in-
ternational economy in the years after World War II. After the war, most
agreed that international economic instability was one of the principal
causes of the war, and that such instability needed to be prevented in
the future. The agreement, which was developed by renowned economists
John Maynard Keynes and Harry Dexter White, was initially proposed to
Great Britain as a part of the Lend-Lease Act—an American act designed to
assist Great Britain in postwar redevelopment efforts. After various negoti-
ations, the ﬁnal form of the Bretton Woods Agreement consisted of several
key points:
1. The formation of key international authorities designed to promote fair
trade and international economic harmony.
21


--- PAGE 38 ---
22
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
2. The ﬁxing of exchange rates among currencies.
3. The convertibility between gold and the U.S. dollar, thus empowering
the U.S. dollar as the reserve currency of choice for the world.
Of the three aforementioned parameters, only the ﬁrst point is still in
existence today. The organizations formed as a direct result of Bretton
Woods include the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which are still in exis-
tence today and play a crucial role in the development and regulation of
international economies. The IMF, for instance, initially enforced the price
of $35 per ounce of gold that was to be ﬁxed under the Bretton Woods
system, as well as the ﬁxing of exchange rates that occurred while Bretton
Woods was in operation (and the ﬁnancing required to ensure that ﬁxed ex-
change rates would not create fundamental distortions in the international
economy).
Since the demise of Bretton Woods, the IMF has worked closely with
another progeny of Bretton Woods: the World Bank. Together, the two in-
stitutions now regularly lend funds to developing nations, thus assisting
them in the development of a public infrastructure capable of supporting
a sound mercantile economy that can contribute in an international arena.
And, in order to ensure that these nations can actually enjoy equal and le-
gitimate access to trade with their industrialized counterparts, the World
Bank and IMF must work closely with GATT. While GATT was initially
meant to be a temporary organization, it now operates to encourage the
dismantling of trade barriers—namely tariffs and quotas.
The Bretton Woods Agreement was in operation from 1944 to 1971,
when it was replaced with the Smithsonian Agreement, an international
contract of sorts pioneered by U.S. President Richard Nixon out of the ne-
cessity to accommodate for Bretton Woods’ shortcomings. Unfortunately,
the Smithsonian Agreement possessed the same critical weakness: while
it did not include gold/U.S. dollar convertibility, it did maintain ﬁxed ex-
change rates—a facet that did not accommodate the ongoing U.S. trade
deﬁcit and the international need for a weaker U.S. dollar. As a result, the
Smithsonian Agreement was short-lived.
Ultimately, the exchange rates of the world evolved into a free mar-
ket, whereby supply and demand were the sole criteria that determined
the value of a currency. While this did and still does result in a number of
currency crises and greater volatility between currencies, it also allowed
the market to become self-regulating, and thus the market could dictate
the appropriate value of a currency without any hindrances.
As for Bretton Woods, perhaps its most memorable contribution to
the international economic arena was its role in changing the perception


--- PAGE 39 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
23
regarding the U.S. dollar. While the British pound is still substantially
stronger, and while the euro is a revolutionary currency blazing new fron-
tiers in both social behavior and international trade, the U.S. dollar remains
the world’s reserve currency of choice for the time being. This is undeni-
ably due largely in part to the Bretton Woods Agreement: by establishing
dollar/gold convertibility, the dollar’s role as the world’s most accessible
and reliable currency was ﬁrmly cemented. And thus, while Bretton Woods
may be a doctrine of yesteryear, its impact on the U.S. dollar and interna-
tional economics still resonates today.
END OF BRETTON WOODS: FREE
MARKET CAPITALISM IS BORN (1971)
On August 15, 1971, it became ofﬁcial: the Bretton Woods system, a system
used to ﬁx the value of a currency to the value of gold, was abandoned
once and for all. While it had been exorcised before, only to subsequently
emerge in a new form, this ﬁnal eradication of the Bretton Woods system
was truly its last stand: no longer would currencies be ﬁxed in value to
gold, allowed to ﬂuctuate only in a 1 percent range, but instead their fair
valuation could be determined by free market behavior such as trade ﬂows
and foreign direct investment.
While U.S. President Nixon was conﬁdent that the end of the Bretton
Woods system would bring about better times for the international econ-
omy, he was not a believer that the free market could dictate a currency’s
true valuation in a fair and catastrophe-free manner. Nixon, as well as most
economists, reasoned that an entirely unstructured foreign exchange mar-
ket would result in competing devaluations, which in turn would lead to the
breakdown of international trade and investment. The end result, Nixon
and his board of economic advisers reasoned, would be global depression.
Accordingly, a few months later, the Smithsonian Agreement was in-
troduced. Hailed by President Nixon as the “greatest monetary agreement
in the history of the world,” the Smithsonian Agreement strived to main-
tain ﬁxed exchange rates, but to do so without the backing of gold. Its key
difference from the Bretton Woods system was that the value of the dollar
could ﬂoat in a range of 2.25 percent, as opposed to just 1 percent under
Bretton Woods.
Ultimately, the Smithsonian Agreement proved to be unfeasible as
well. Without exchange rates ﬁxed to gold, the free market gold price shot
up to $215 per ounce. Moreover, the U.S. trade deﬁcit continued to grow,
and from a fundamental standpoint, the U.S. dollar needed to be deval-
ued beyond the 2.25 percent parameters established by the Smithsonian


--- PAGE 40 ---
24
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Agreement. In light of these problems, the foreign exchange markets were
forced to close in February 1972.
The forex markets reopened in March 1973, and this time they were
not bound by a Smithsonian Agreement: the value of the U.S. dollar was
to be determined entirely by the market, as its value was not ﬁxed to any
commodity, nor was its exchange rate ﬂuctuation conﬁned to certain pa-
rameters. While this did provide the U.S. dollar, and other currencies by
default, the agility required to adapt to a new and rapidly evolving interna-
tional trading environment, it also set the stage for unprecedented inﬂation.
The end of Bretton Woods and the Smithsonian Agreement, as well as con-
ﬂicts in the Middle East resulting in substantially higher oil prices, helped
to create stagﬂation—the synthesis of unemployment and inﬂation—in the
U.S. economy. It would not be until later in the decade, when Federal Re-
serve Chairman Paul Volcker initiated new economic policies and Presi-
dent Ronald Reagan introduced a new ﬁscal agenda, that the U.S. dollar
would return to normal valuations. And by then, the foreign exchange
markets had thoroughly developed, and were now capable of serving a mul-
titude of purposes: in addition to employing a laissez-faire style of regula-
tion for international trade, they also were beginning to attract speculators
seeking to participate in a market with unrivaled liquidity and continued
growth. Ultimately, the death of Bretton Woods in 1971 marked the begin-
ning of a new economic era, one that liberated international trading while
also proliferating speculative opportunities.
PLAZA ACCORD—DEVALUATION OF U.S.
DOLLAR (1985)
After the demise of all the various exchange rate regulatory mechanisms
that characterized the twentieth century—the gold standard, the Bretton
Woods standard, and the Smithsonian Agreement—the currency market
was left with virtually no regulation other than the mythical “invisible
hand” of free market capitalism, one that supposedly strived to create
economic balance through supply and demand. Unfortunately, due to
a number of unforeseen economic events—such as the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil crises, stagﬂation through-
out the 1970s, and drastic changes in the U.S. Federal Reserve’s ﬁscal
policy—supply and demand, in and of themselves, became insufﬁcient
means by which the currency markets could be regulated. A system of sorts
was needed, but not one that was inﬂexible. Fixation of currency values to
a commodity, such as gold, proved to be too rigid for economic develop-
ment, as was also the notion of ﬁxing maximum exchange rate ﬂuctuations.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
25
The balance between structure and rigidity was one that had plagued the
currency markets throughout the twentieth century, and while advance-
ments had been made, a deﬁnitive solution was still greatly needed.
And hence in 1985, the respective ministers of ﬁnance and central bank
governors of the world’s leading economies—France, Germany, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and the United States—convened in New York City with
the hopes of arranging a diplomatic agreement of sorts that would work
to optimize the economic effectiveness of the foreign exchange markets.
Meeting at the Plaza Hotel, the international leaders came to certain agree-
ments regarding speciﬁc economies and the international economy as a
whole.
Across the world, inﬂation was at very low levels. In contrast to
the stagﬂation of the 1970s—where inﬂation was high and real economic
growth was low—the global economy in 1985 had done a complete 180-
degree turn, as inﬂation was now low but growth was strong.
While low inﬂation, even when coupled with robust economic growth,
still allowed for low interest rates—a circumstance developing countries
particularly enjoyed—there was an imminent danger of protectionist poli-
cies like tariffs entering the economy. The United States was experiencing
a large and growing current account deﬁcit, while Japan and Germany were
facing large and growing surpluses. An imbalance so fundamental in nature
could create serious economic disequilibrium, which in turn would result
in a distortion of the foreign exchange markets and thus the international
economy.
The results of current account imbalances, and the protectionist poli-
cies that ensued, required action. Ultimately, it was believed that the rapid
acceleration in the value of the U.S. dollar, which appreciated more than
80 percent against the currencies of its major trading partners, was the pri-
mary culprit. The rising value of the U.S. dollar helped to create enormous
trade deﬁcits. A dollar with a lower valuation, on the other hand, would be
more conducive to stabilizing the international economy, as it would nat-
urally bring about a greater balance between the exporting and importing
capabilities of all countries.
At the meeting in the Plaza Hotel, the United States persuaded the
other attendees to coordinate a multilateral intervention, and on Septem-
ber 22, 1985, the Plaza Accord was implemented. This agreement was de-
signed to allow for a controlled decline of the dollar and the appreciation
of the main antidollar currencies. Each country agreed to changes to its
economic policies and to intervene in currency markets as necessary to
get the dollar down. The United States agreed to cut its budget deﬁcit and
to lower interest rates. France, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan
all agreed to raise interest rates. Germany also agreed to institute tax cuts
while Japan agreed to let the value of the yen “fully reﬂect the underlying


--- PAGE 42 ---
26
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
strength of the Japanese economy.” However, the problem with the actual
implementation of the Plaza Accord was that not every country adhered
to its pledges. The United States in particular did not follow through with
its initial promise to cut the budget deﬁcit. Japan was severely hurt by the
sharp rise in the yen, as its exporters were unable to remain competitive
overseas, and it is argued that this eventually triggered a 10-year recession
in Japan. The United States, in contrast, enjoyed considerable growth and
price stability as a result of the agreement.
The effects of the multilateral intervention were seen immediately, and
within two years the dollar had fallen 46 percent and 50 percent against the
deutsche mark (DEM) and the Japanese yen (JPY), respectively. Figure 2.1
shows this depreciation of the U.S. dollar against the DEM and the JPY. The
U.S. economy became far more export-oriented as a result, while other in-
dustrial countries like Germany and Japan assumed the role of importing.
This gradually resolved the current account deﬁcits for the time being, and
also ensured that protectionist policies were minimal and nonthreatening.
But perhaps most importantly, the Plaza Accord cemented the role of the
central banks in regulating exchange rate movement: yes, the rates would
not be ﬁxed, and hence would be determined primarily by supply and de-
mand; but ultimately, such an invisible hand is insufﬁcient, and it was the
FIGURE 2.1
Plaza Accord Price Action


--- PAGE 43 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
27
right and responsibility of the world’s central banks to intervene on behalf
of the international economy when necessary.
GEORGE SOROS—THE MAN WHO BROKE
THE BANK OF ENGLAND
When George Soros placed a $10 billion speculative bet against the U.K.
pound and won, he became universally known as “the man who broke the
Bank of England.” Whether you love him or hate him, Soros led the charge
in one of the most fascinating events in currency trading history.
The United Kingdom Joins the Exchange
Rate Mechanism
In 1979, a Franco-German initiative set up the European Monetary System
(EMS) in order to stabilize exchange rates, reduce inﬂation, and prepare
for monetary integration. The Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), one of
the EMS’s main components, gave each participatory currency a central
exchange rate against a basket of currencies, the European Currency Unit
(ECU). Participants (initially France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Bel-
gium, Denmark, Ireland, and Luxembourg) were then required to maintain
their exchange rates within a 2.25 percent ﬂuctuation band above or below
each bilateral central rate. The ERM was an adjustable-peg system, and
nine realignments would occur between 1979 and 1987. While the United
Kingdom was not one of the original members, it would eventually join in
1990 at a rate of 2.95 deutsche marks to the pound and with a ﬂuctuation
band of +/– 6 percent.
Until mid-1992, the ERM appeared to be a success, as a disciplinary ef-
fect had reduced inﬂation throughout Europe under the leadership of the
German Bundesbank. The stability wouldn’t last, however, as international
investors started worrying that the exchange rate values of several
currencies within the ERM were inappropriate. Following German reuni-
ﬁcation in 1989, the nation’s government spending surged, forcing the
Bundesbank to print more money. This led to higher inﬂation and left the
German central bank with little choice but to increase interest rates. But
the rate hike had additional repercussions—because it placed upward pres-
sure on the German mark. This forced other central banks to raise their in-
terest rates as well, so as to maintain the pegged currency exchange rates
(a direct application of Irving Fisher’s interest rate parity theory). Realiz-
ing that the United Kingdom’s weak economy and high unemployment rate


--- PAGE 44 ---
28
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
would not permit the British government to maintain this policy for long,
George Soros stepped into action.
Soros Bets Against Success of U.K. Involvement
in ERM
The Quantum hedge fund manager essentially wanted to bet that the pound
would depreciate because the United Kingdom would either devalue the
pound or leave the ERM. Thanks to the progressive removal of capital con-
trols during the EMS years, international investors at the time had more
freedom than ever to take advantage of perceived disequilibriums, so Soros
established short positions in pounds and long positions in marks by bor-
rowing pounds and investing in mark-denominated assets. He also made
great use of options and futures. In all, his positions accounted for a gargan-
tuan $10 billion. Soros was not the only one; many other investors soon fol-
lowed suit. Everyone was selling pounds, placing tremendous downward
pressure on the currency.
At ﬁrst, the Bank of England tried to defend the pegged rates by buying
15 billion pounds with its large reserve assets, but its sterilized interven-
tions (whereby the monetary base is held constant thanks to open market
interventions) were limited in their effectiveness. The pound was trading
dangerously close to the lower levels of its ﬁxed band. On September 16,
1992, a day that would later be known as Black Wednesday, the bank an-
nounced a 2 percent rise in interest rates (from 10 percent to 12 percent)
in an attempt to boost the pound’s appeal. A few hours later, it promised to
raise rates again, to 15 percent, but international investors such as Soros
could not be swayed, knowing that huge proﬁts were right around the
corner. Traders kept selling pounds in huge volumes, and the Bank of
England kept buying them until, ﬁnally, at 7:00 p.m. that same day, Chan-
cellor Norman Lamont announced Britain would leave the ERM and that
rates would return to their initial level of 10 percent. The chaotic Black
Wednesday marked the beginning of a steep depreciation in the pound’s
effective value.
Whether the return to a ﬂoating currency was due to the Soros-led at-
tack on the pound or because of simple fundamental analysis is still de-
bated today. What is certain, however, is that the pound’s depreciation of
almost 15 percent against the deutsche mark and 25 percent against the
dollar over the next ﬁve weeks (as seen in Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3) re-
sulted in tremendous proﬁts for Soros and other traders. Within a month,
the Quantum Fund cashed in on approximately $2 billion by selling the now
more expensive deutsche marks and buying back the now cheaper pounds.
“The man who broke the Bank of England” showed how central banks can
still be vulnerable to speculative attacks.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
29
FIGURE 2.2
GBP/DEM After Soros
FIGURE 2.3
GBP/USD After Soros


--- PAGE 46 ---
30
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
ASIAN FINANCIAL CRISIS (1997–1998)
Falling like a set of dominos on July 2, 1997, the relatively nascent Asian
tiger economies created a perfect example in showing the interdependence
of global capital markets and their subsequent effects throughout inter-
national currency forums. Based on several fundamental breakdowns, the
cause of the contagion stemmed largely from shrouded lending practices,
inﬂated trade deﬁcits, and immature capital markets. Added together, the
factors contributed to a “perfect storm” that left major regional markets
incapacitated and once-prized currencies devalued to signiﬁcantly lower
levels. With adverse effects easily seen in the equities markets, currency
market ﬂuctuations were negatively impacted in much the same manner
during this time period.
The Bubble
Leading up to 1997, investors had become increasingly attracted to Asian
investment prospects, focusing on real estate development and domestic
equities. As a result, foreign investment capital ﬂowed into the region as
economic growth rates climbed on improved production in countries like
Malaysia, the Philippines, Indonesia, and South Korea. Thailand, home of
the baht, experienced a 13 percent growth rate in 1988 (falling to 6.5 per-
cent in 1996). Additional lending support for a stronger economy came
from the enactment of a ﬁxed currency peg to the more formidable U.S.
dollar. With a ﬁxed valuation to the greenback, countries like Thailand
could ensure ﬁnancial stability in their own markets and a constant rate
for export trading purposes with the world’s largest economy. Ultimately,
the region’s national currencies appreciated as underlying fundamentals
were justiﬁed, and speculative positions in expectation of further climbs in
price mounted.
Ballooning Current Account Deﬁcits and
Nonperforming Loans
However, in early 1997, a shift in sentiment had begun to occur as inter-
national account deﬁcits became increasingly difﬁcult for respective gov-
ernments to handle and lending practices were revealed to be detrimen-
tal to the economic infrastructure. In particular, economists were alerted
to the fact that Thailand’s current account deﬁcit had ballooned in 1996
to $14.7 billion (it had been climbing since 1992). Although comparatively
smaller than the U.S. deﬁcit, the gap represented 8 percent of the coun-
try’s gross domestic product. Shrouded lending practices also contributed


--- PAGE 47 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
31
heavily to these breakdowns, as close personal relationships of borrowers
with high-ranking banking ofﬁcials were well rewarded and surprisingly
common throughout the region. This aspect affected many of South Ko-
rea’s highly leveraged conglomerates as total nonperforming loan values
sky-rocketed to 7.5 percent of gross domestic product.
Additional evidence of these practices could be observed in ﬁnancial
institutions throughout Japan. After announcing a $136 billion total in ques-
tionable and nonperforming loans in 1994, Japanese authorities admitted
to an alarming $400 billion total a year later. Coupled with a then crippled
stock market, cooling real estate values, and dramatic slowdowns in the
economy, investors saw opportunity in a depreciating yen, subsequently
adding selling pressure to neighbor currencies. When Japan’s asset bub-
ble collapsed, asset prices fell by $10 trillion, with the fall in real estate
prices accounting for nearly 65 percent of the total decline, which was
worth two years of national output. This fall in asset prices sparked the
banking crisis in Japan. It began in the early 1990s and then developed into
a full-blown systemic crisis in 1997 following the failure of a number of
high-proﬁle ﬁnancial institutions. In response, Japanese monetary authori-
ties warned of potentially increasing benchmark interest rates in hopes of
defending the domestic currency valuation. Unfortunately, these consid-
erations never materialized and a shortfall ensued. Sparked mainly by an
announcement of a managed ﬂoat of the Thai baht, the slide snowballed as
central bank reserves evaporated and currency price levels became unsus-
tainable in light of downside selling pressure.
Currency Crisis
Following mass short speculation and attempted intervention, the afore-
mentioned Asian economies were left ruined and momentarily incapaci-
tated. The Thailand baht, once a prized possession, was devalued by as
much as 48 percent, even slumping closer to a 100 percent fall at the turn
of the New Year. The most adversely affected was the Indonesian rupiah.
Relatively stable prior to the onset of a “crawling peg” with the Thai baht,
the rupiah fell a whopping 228 percent from its previous high of 12,950 to
the ﬁxed U.S. dollar. These particularly volatile price actions are reﬂected
in Figure 2.4. Among the majors, the Japanese yen fell approximately
23 percent from its high to its low against the U.S. dollar in 1997 and 1998,
as shown in Figure 2.5.
The ﬁnancial crisis of 1997–1998 revealed the interconnectivity of
economies and their effects on the global currency markets. Addition-
ally, it showed the inability of central banks to successfully intervene in
currency valuations when confronted with overwhelming market forces
along with the absence of secure economic fundamentals. Today, with the


--- PAGE 48 ---
32
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 2.4
Asian Crisis Price Action
FIGURE 2.5
USD/JPY Asian Crisis Price Action
assistance of IMF reparation packages and the implementation of stricter
requirements, Asia’s four little dragons are churning away once again. With
inﬂationary benchmarks and a revived exporting market, Southeast Asia is
building back its once prominent stature among the world’s industrialized
economic regions. With the experience of evaporating currency reserves


--- PAGE 49 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
33
under their belts, the Asian tigers now take active initiatives to ensure that
they have a large pot of reserves on hand in case speculators attempt to
attack their currencies once again.
INTRODUCTION OF THE EURO (1999)
The introduction of the euro was a monumental achievement, marking the
largest monetary changeover ever. The euro was ofﬁcially launched as an
electronic trading currency on January 1, 1999. The 11 initial member states
of the European Monetary Union (EMU) were: Belgium, Germany, Spain,
France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, and
Finland. Greece joined two years later. Each country ﬁxed its currency
to a speciﬁc conversion rate against the euro, and a common monetary
policy governed by the European Central Bank (ECB) was adopted. To
many economists, the system would ideally include all of the original 15
European Union (EU) nations, but the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Den-
mark decided to keep their own currencies for the time being. Euro notes
and coins did not begin circulation until the ﬁrst two months of 2002. In
deciding whether to adopt the euro, EU members all had to weigh the pros
and cons of such an important decision.
While ease of traveling is perhaps the most salient issue to EMU citi-
zens, the euro also brings about numerous other beneﬁts:
r It eliminates exchange rate ﬂuctuations, thereby providing a more sta-
ble environment to trade within the euro area.
r The purging of all exchange rate risk within the zone allows businesses
to plan investment decisions with greater certainty.
r Transaction costs diminish (mainly those relating to foreign exchange
operations, hedging operations, cross-border payments, and the man-
agement of several currency accounts).
r Prices become more transparent as consumers and businesses can
compare prices across countries more easily. This, in turn, increases
competition.
r The huge single currency market becomes more attractive for foreign
investors.
r The economy’s magnitude and stability allow the ECB to control inﬂa-
tion with lower interest rates thanks to increased credibility.
Yet the euro is not without its limitations. Leaving aside political
sovereignty issues, the main problem is that, by adopting the euro, a nation
essentially forfeits any independent monetary policy. Since each country’s
economy is not perfectly correlated to the EMU’s economy, a nation might


--- PAGE 50 ---
34
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
ﬁnd the ECB hiking interest rates during a domestic recession. This is espe-
cially true for many of the smaller nations. As a result, countries try to rely
more heavily on ﬁscal policy, but the efﬁciency of ﬁscal policy is limited
when it is not effectively combined with monetary policy. This inefﬁciency
is only further exacerbated by the 3 percent of GDP limit on budget deﬁcits,
as stipulated by the Stability and Growth Pact.
Some concerns also exist regarding the ECB’s effectiveness as a cen-
tral bank. While its target inﬂation is slightly below 2 percent, the euro
area’s inﬂation edged above the benchmark from 2000 to 2002, and has
of late continued to surpass the self-imposed objective. From 1999 to late
2002, a lack of conﬁdence in the union’s currency (and in the union itself)
led to a 24 percent depreciation, from approximately $1.15 to the dollar in
January 1999 to $0.88 in May 2000, forcing the ECB to intervene in foreign
exchange markets in the last few months of 2000. Since then, however,
things have greatly changed; the euro now trades at a premium to the dol-
lar, and many analysts claim that the euro will someday replace the dollar
as the world’s dominant international currency. (Figure 2.6 shows a chart
of the euro since it was launched in 1999.)
FIGURE 2.6
EUR/USD Since Inception


--- PAGE 51 ---
Historical Events in the FX Market
35
There are 10 more members slated to adopt the euro over the next
few years. The enlargement, which will grow the EMU’s population by
one-ﬁfth, is both a political and an economic landmark event: Of the new
entrants, all but two are former Soviet republics, joining the EU after 15
years of restructuring. Once assimilated, these countries will become part
of the world’s largest free trade zone, a bloc of 450 million people. Con-
sequently, the three largest accession countries, Poland, Hungary, and the
Czech Republic—which comprise 79 percent of new member combined
GDP—are not likely to adopt the euro anytime soon. While euro members
are mandated to cap ﬁscal deﬁcits at 3 percent of GDP, each of these three
countries currently runs a projected deﬁcit at or near 6 percent. In a prob-
able scenario, euro entry for Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic are
likely to be delayed until 2009 at the earliest. Even smaller states whose
economies at present meet EU requirements face a long process in replac-
ing their national currencies. States that already maintain a ﬁxed euro ex-
change rate—Estonia and Lithuania—could participate in the ERM earlier,
but even on this relatively fast track, they would not be able to adopt the
euro until 2007.
The 1993 the Maastricht Treaty set ﬁve main convergence criteria for
member states to join the EMU.
Maastricht Treaty: Convergence Criteria
1. The country’s government budget deﬁcit could not be greater than
3 percent of GDP.
2. The country’s government debt could not be larger than 60 percent
of GDP.
3. The country’s exchange rate had to be maintained within ERM bands
without any realignment for two years prior to joining.
4. The country’s inﬂation rate could not be higher than 1.5 percent above
the average inﬂation rate of the three EU countries with the lowest
inﬂation rates.
5. The country’s long-term interest rate on government bonds could not
be higher than 2 percent above the average of the comparable rates in
the three countries with the lowest inﬂation.


--- PAGE 52 ---


--- PAGE 53 ---
C H A P T E R 3
What Moves the
Currency Market
in the
Long Term?
T
here are two major ways to analyze ﬁnancial markets: fundamental
analysis and technical analysis. Fundamental analysis is based on un-
derlying economic conditions, while technical analysis uses historical
prices in an effort to predict future movements. Ever since technical
analysis ﬁrst surfaced, there has been an ongoing debate as to which
methodology is more successful. Short-term traders prefer to use technical
analysis, focusing their strategies primarily on price action, while medium-
term traders tend to use fundamental analysis to determine a currency’s
proper valuation, as well as its probable future valuation.
Before implementing successful trading strategies, it is important to
understand what drives the movements of currencies in the foreign ex-
change market. The best strategies tend to be the ones that combine both
fundamental and technical analysis. Too often perfect technical formations
have failed because of major fundamental events. The same occurs with
fundamentals; there may be sharp gyrations in price action one day on the
back of no economic news released, which suggests that the price action
is random or based on nothing more than pattern formations. Therefore,
it is very important for technical traders to be aware of the key economic
data or events that are scheduled for release and, in turn, for fundamen-
tal traders to be aware of important technical levels on which the general
market may be focusing.
37


--- PAGE 54 ---
38
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
Fundamental analysis focuses on the economic, social, and political forces
that drive supply and demand. Those using fundamental analysis as a trad-
ing tool look at various macroeconomic indicators such as growth rates,
interest rates, inﬂation, and unemployment. We list the most important eco-
nomic releases in Chapter 12 as well as the most market-moving pieces of
data for the U.S. dollar in Chapter 4. Fundamental analysts will combine
all of this information to assess current and future performance. This re-
quires a great deal of work and thorough analysis, as there is no single set
of beliefs that guides fundamental analysis. Traders employing fundamen-
tal analysis need to continually keep abreast of news and announcements
that can indicate potential changes to the economic, social, and political
environment. All traders should have some awareness of the broad eco-
nomic conditions before placing trades. This is especially important for day
traders who are trying to make trading decisions based on news events be-
cause even though Federal Reserve monetary policy decisions are always
important, if the rate move is already completely priced into the market,
then the actual reaction in the EUR/USD, say, could be nominal.
Taking a step back, currency prices move primarily based on supply
and demand. That is, on the most fundamental level, a currency rallies be-
cause there is demand for that currency. Regardless of whether the de-
mand is for hedging, speculative, or conversion purposes, true movements
are based on the need for the currency. Currency values decrease when
there is excess supply. Supply and demand should be the real determinants
for predicting future movements. However, how to predict supply and de-
mand is not as simple as many would think. There are many factors that
contribute to the net supply and demand for a currency, such as capital
ﬂows, trade ﬂows, speculative needs, and hedging needs.
For example, the U.S. dollar was very strong (against the euro) from
1999 to the end of 2001, a situation primarily driven by the U.S. Internet
and equity market boom and the desire for foreign investors to participate
in these elevated returns. This demand for U.S. assets required foreign in-
vestors to sell their local currencies and purchase U.S. dollars. Since the
end of 2001, when geopolitical uncertainty rose, the United States started
cutting interest rates and foreign investors began to sell U.S. assets in
search of higher yields elsewhere. This required foreign investors to sell
U.S. dollars, increasing supply and lowering the dollar’s value against other
major currencies. The availability of funding or interest in buying a cur-
rency is a major factor that can impact the direction that a currency trades.
It has been a primary determinant for the U.S. dollar between 2002 and
2005. Foreign ofﬁcial purchases of U.S. assets (also known as the Treasury


--- PAGE 55 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
39
international capital ﬂow or TIC data) have become one of the most impor-
tant economic indicators anticipated by the markets.
Capital and Trade Flows
Capital ﬂows and trade ﬂows constitute a country’s balance of payments,
which quantiﬁes the amount of demand for a currency over a given period
of time. Theoretically, a balance of payments equal to zero is required for a
currency to maintain its current valuation. A negative balance of payments
number indicates that capital is leaving the economy at a more rapid rate
than it is entering, and hence theoretically the currency should fall in value.
This is particularly important in current conditions (at the time of
this book’s publication) where the United States is running a consistently
large trade deﬁcit without sufﬁcient foreign inﬂow to fund that deﬁcit. The
Japanese yen is another good example. As one of the world’s largest ex-
porters, Japan runs a very high trade surplus. Therefore, despite a zero
interest rate policy that prevents capital ﬂows from increasing, the yen has
a natural tendency to trade higher based on trade ﬂows, which is the other
side of the equation. To be more speciﬁc, here is a detailed explanation of
what capital and trade ﬂows encompass.
Capital Flows: Measuring Currency Bought
and Sold
Capital ﬂows measure the net amount of a currency that is being purchased
or sold due to capital investments. A positive capital ﬂow balance implies
that foreign inﬂows of physical or portfolio investments into a country
exceed outﬂows. A negative capital ﬂow balance indicates that there are
more physical or portfolio investments bought by domestic investors than
foreign investors. Let’s look at these two types of capital ﬂows—physical
ﬂows and portfolio ﬂows.
Physical Flows
Physical ﬂows encompass actual foreign direct invest-
ments by corporations such as investments in real estate, manufacturing,
and local acquisitions. All of these require that a foreign corporation sell
the local currency and buy the foreign currency, which leads to movements
in the FX market. This is particularly important for global corporate acqui-
sitions that involve more cash than stock.
Physical ﬂows are important to watch, as they represent the under-
lying changes in actual physical investment activity. These ﬂows shift in
response to changes in each country’s ﬁnancial health and growth opportu-
nities. Changes in local laws that encourage foreign investment also serve
to promote physical ﬂows. For example, due to China’s entry into the World


--- PAGE 56 ---
40
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Trade Organization (WTO), its foreign investment laws have been relaxed.
As a result of its cheap labor and attractive revenue opportunities (popu-
lation of over 1 billion), corporations globally have ﬂooded China with in-
vestments. From an FX perspective, in order to fund investments in China,
foreign corporations need to sell their local currency and buy Chinese ren-
minbi (RMB).
Portfolio Flows
Portfolio ﬂows involve measuring capital inﬂows and
outﬂows in equity markets and ﬁxed income markets.
Equity Markets
As technology has enabled greater ease with respect
to transportation of capital, investing in global equity markets has become
far more feasible. Accordingly, a rallying stock market in any part of the
world serves as an ideal opportunity for all, regardless of geographic loca-
tion. The result of this has become a strong correlation between a country’s
equity markets and its currency: if the equity market is rising, investment
dollars generally come in to seize the opportunity. Alternatively, falling eq-
uity markets could prompt domestic investors to sell their shares of local
publicly traded ﬁrms to capture investment opportunities abroad.
The attraction of equity markets compared to ﬁxed income markets
has increased across the years. Since the early 1990s, the ratio of foreign
transactions in U.S. government bonds over U.S. equities has declined from
10 to 1 to 2 to 1. As indicated in Figure 3.1, it is evident that the Dow Jones
Industrial Average had a high correlation (of approximately 81 percent)
Dow Jones Industrial Average and USD/EUR
12500
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
11500
10500
9500
8500
7500
6500
5500
4500
3500
1/31/94 6/30/94 11/30/94 4/28/95
2/29/96
9/29/95
7/31/96 12/31/96 5/30/97 10/31/97 3/31/98 8/31/98 1/29/99
6/30/99 11/30/99
 INDU Index Px Last          USD/EUR Currency
FIGURE 3.1
Dow Jones Industrial Average and USD/EUR


--- PAGE 57 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
41
with the U.S. dollar (against the deutsche mark) between 1994 and 1999.
In addition, from 1991 to 1999 the Dow increased 300 percent, while
the U.S. dollar index appreciated nearly 30 percent for the same time
period. As a result, currency traders closely followed the global equity
markets in an effort to predict short-term and intermediate-term equity-
based capital ﬂows. However, this relationship has shifted since the tech
bubble burst in the United States, as foreign investors remained relatively
risk-averse, causing a lower correlation between the performance of the
U.S. equity market and the U.S. dollar. Nevertheless, a relationship does
still exist, making it important for all traders to keep an eye on global
market performances in search of intermarket opportunities.
Fixed Income Markets
Just as the equity market is correlated to ex-
change rate movement, so too is the ﬁxed income market. In times of global
uncertainty, ﬁxed income investments can become particularly appealing,
due to the inherent safety they possess. As a result, economies boasting
the most valuable ﬁxed income opportunities will be capable of attracting
foreign investment—which will naturally ﬁrst require the purchasing of the
country’s respective currency.
A good gauge of ﬁxed income capital ﬂows are the short- and long-
term yields of international government bonds. It is useful to monitor the
spread differentials between the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note
and the yields on foreign bonds. The reason is that international investors
tend to place their funds in countries with the highest-yielding assets. If
U.S. assets have one of the highest yields, this would encourage more in-
vestments in U.S. ﬁnancial instruments, hence beneﬁting the U.S. dollar.
Investors can also use short-term yields such as the spreads on two-year
government notes to gauge short-term ﬂow of international funds. Aside
from government bond yields, federal funds futures can also be used to es-
timate movement of U.S. funds, as they price in the expectation of future
Fed interest rate policy. Euribor futures, or futures on the Euro Interbank
Offered Rate, are a barometer for the euro region’s expected future interest
rates and can give an indication of euro region future policy movements.
We cover using ﬁxed income products to trade FX further in Chapter 10.
Trade Flows: Measuring Exports versus Imports
Trade ﬂows are the basis of all international transactions. Just as the in-
vestment environment of a given economy is a prime determinant of its
currency valuation, trade ﬂows represent a country’s net trade balance.
Countries that are net exporters—meaning they export more to interna-
tional clients than they import from international producers—will experi-
ence a net trade surplus. Countries that are net exporters are more likely


--- PAGE 58 ---
42
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
to have their currency rise in value, since from the perspective of interna-
tional trade, their currency is being bought more than it is sold: interna-
tional clients interested in buying the exported product/service must ﬁrst
buy the appropriate currency, thus creating demand for the currency of the
exporter.
Countries that are net importers—meaning they make more interna-
tional purchases than international sales—experience what is known as a
trade deﬁcit, which in turn has the potential to drive the value of the cur-
rency down. In order to engage in international purchases, importers must
sell their currency to purchase that of the retailer of the good or service; ac-
cordingly, on a large scale this could have the effect of driving the currency
down. This concept is important because it is a primary reason why many
economists say that the dollar needs to continue to fall over the next few
years to stop the United States from repeatedly hitting record high trade
deﬁcits.
To clarify this further, suppose, for example, that the U.K. economy is
booming, and that its stock market is rallying as well. Meanwhile, in the
United States, a lackluster economy is creating a shortage of investment
opportunities. In such a scenario, the natural result would be for U.S. resi-
dents to sell their dollars and buy British pounds to take advantage of the
rallying U.K. economy. This would result in capital outﬂow from the United
States and capital inﬂow for the United Kingdom. From an exchange rate
perspective, this would induce a fall in the USD coupled with a rise in the
GBP as demand for USD declines and demand for GBP increases; in other
words, the GBP/USD would rise.
For day and swing traders, a tip for keeping on top of the broader eco-
nomic picture is to ﬁgure out how economic data for a particular country
stacks up.
Trading Tip: Charting Economic Surprises
A good tip for traders is to stack up economic data surprises against price
action to help explain and forecast the future movement in currencies.
Figure 3.2 presents a sample of what can be done. The bar graph shows
the percentages of surprise that economic indicators have compared to
consensus forecasts, while the dark line traces price action for the period
during which the data was released; the white line is a simple price regres-
sion line. This charting can be done for all of the major currency pairs,
providing a visual guide to understanding whether price action has been in
line with economic fundamentals and helping to forecast future price ac-
tion. This data is provided on a monthly basis on www.dailyfx.com, listed
under Charting Economic Fundamentals.


--- PAGE 59 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
43
FIGURE 3.2
Charting Economic Surprises
According to the chart in Figure 3.2, in November 2004, there were 12
out of 15 positive economic surprises and yet the dollar sold off against the
euro during the month of December, which was the month during which
the economic data was released. Although this methodology is inexact, the
analysis is simple and past charts have yielded some extremely useful clues
to future price action. Figure 3.3 shows how the EUR/USD moved in the fol-
lowing month. As you can see, the EUR/USD quickly corrected itself during
the month of January, indicating that the fundamental divergence of price
action that occurred in December proved to be quite useful to dollar longs,
who harvested almost 600 pips as the euro quickly retracted a large part of
its gains in January. This method of analysis, called “variant perception,”
was invented by the legendary hedge fund manager Michael Steinhardt,
who produced 24 percent average rates of return for 30 consecutive years.
While these charts rarely offer such clear-cut signals, their analytical
value may also lie in spotting and interpreting the outlier data. Very large
positive and negative surprises of particular economic statistics can often
yield clues to future price action. If you go back and look at the EUR/USD
charts, you will see that the dollar plunged between October and Decem-
ber. This was triggered by a widening of the current account deﬁcit to a


--- PAGE 60 ---
44
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 3.3
EUR/USD Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
record high in October 2004. Economic fundamentals matter perhaps more
in the foreign exchange market than in any other market, and charts such
as these could provide valuable clues to price direction. Generally, the
15 most important economic indicators are chosen for each region and
then a price regression line is superimposed over the past 20 days of
price data.
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Prior to the mid-1980s, the FX market was primarily dominated by funda-
mental traders. However, with the rising popularity of technical analysis
and the advent of new technologies, the inﬂuence of technical trading on
the FX market has increased signiﬁcantly. The availability of high lever-
age has led to an increased number of momentum or model funds, which
have become important participants in the FX market with the ability to
inﬂuence currency prices.
Technical analysis focuses on the study of price movements. Techni-
cal analysts use historical currency data to forecast the direction of future
prices. The premise of technical analysis is that all current market informa-
tion is already reﬂected in the price of each currency; therefore, studying


--- PAGE 61 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
45
price action is all that is required to make informed trading decisions. In
addition, technical analysis works under the assumption that history tends
to repeat itself.
Technical analysis is a very popular tool for short-term to medium-term
traders. It works especially well in the currency markets because short-
term currency price ﬂuctuations are primarily driven by human emotions
or market perceptions. The primary tool in technical analysis is charts.
Charts are used to identify trends and patterns in order to ﬁnd proﬁt op-
portunities. The most basic concept of technical analysis is that markets
have a tendency to trend. Being able to identify trends in their earliest
stage of development is the key to technical analysis. Technical analysis
integrates price action and momentum to construct a pictorial representa-
tion of past currency price action to predict future performance. Techni-
cal analysis tools such as Fibonacci retracement levels, moving averages,
oscillators, candlestick charts, and Bollinger bands provide further infor-
mation on the value of emotional extremes of buyers and sellers to direct
traders to levels where greed and fear are the strongest. There are basically
two types of markets, trending and range-bound; in the trade parameters
section (Chapter 8), we attempt to identify rules that would help traders
determine what type of market they are currently trading in and what sort
of trading opportunities they should be looking for.
Is Technical Analysis or Fundamental
Analysis Better?
Technical versus fundamental analysis is a longtime battle, and after many
years there is still no winner or loser. Most traders abide by technical anal-
ysis because it does not require as many hours of study. Technical analysts
can follow many currencies at one time. Fundamental analysts, in contrast,
tend to specialize due to the overwhelming amount of data in the market.
Technical analysis works well because the currency market tends to de-
velop strong trends. Once technical analysis is mastered, it can be applied
with equal ease to any time frame or currency traded.
However, it is important to take into consideration both strategies, as
fundamentals can trigger technical movements such as breakouts or trend
reversals, while technical analysis can explain moves that fundamentals
cannot, especially in quiet markets, such as resistance in trends. For ex-
ample, as you can see in Figure 3.4, in the days leading up to September
11, 2001, USD/JPY had just broken out of a triangle formation and looked
poised to head higher. However, as the chart indicates, instead of breaking
higher as technicians may have expected, USD/JPY broke down following
the terrorist attacks and ended up hitting a low of 115.81 from a high of
121.88 on September 10.


--- PAGE 62 ---
46
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 3.4
USD/JPY September 11, 2001, Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
CURRENCY FORECASTING—WHAT
BOOKWORMS AND ECONOMISTS
LOOK AT
For more avid students of foreign exchange who want to learn more about
fundamental analysis and valuing currencies, this section examines the
different models of currency forecasting employed by the analysts of the
major investment banks. There are seven major models for forecasting cur-
rencies: the balance of payments (BOP) theory, purchasing power parity
(PPP), interest rate parity, the monetary model, the real interest rate differ-
ential model, the asset market model, and the currency substitution model.
Balance of Payments Theory
The balance of payments theory states that exchange rates should be at
their equilibrium level, which is the rate that produces a stable current
account balance. Countries with trade deﬁcits experience a run on their
foreign exchange reserves due to the fact that exporters to that nation
must sell that nation’s currency in order to receive payment. The cheaper
currency makes the nation’s exports less expensive abroad, which in turn
fuels exports and brings the currency into balance.


--- PAGE 63 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
47
What Is the Balance of Payments?
The balance of payments ac-
count is divided into two parts: the current account and the capital ac-
count. The current account measures trade in tangible, visible items such
as cars and manufactured goods; the surplus or deﬁcit between exports
and imports is called the trade balance. The capital account measures ﬂows
of money, such as investments for stocks or bonds. Balance of payments
data can be found on the web site of the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(www.bea.gov).
Trade Flows
The trade balance of a country shows the net difference
over a period of time between a nation’s exports and imports. When a coun-
try imports more than it exports the trade balance is negative or is in a
deﬁcit. If the country exports more than it imports the trade balance is
positive or is in a surplus. The trade balance indicates the redistribution of
wealth among countries and is a major channel through which the macroe-
conomic policies of a country may affect another country.
In general, it is considered to be unfavorable for a country to have a
trade deﬁcit, in that it negatively impacts the value of the nation’s currency.
For example, if U.S. trade ﬁgures show greater imports than exports, more
dollars ﬂow out of the United States and the value of the U.S. currency
depreciates. A positive trade balance, in comparison, will affect the dollar
by causing it to appreciate against the other currencies.
Capital Flows
In addition to trade ﬂows, there are also capital ﬂows
that occur among countries. They record a nation’s incoming and outgoing
investment ﬂows such as payments for entire (or for parts of) companies,
stocks, bonds, bank accounts, real estate, and factories. The capital ﬂows
are inﬂuenced by many factors, including the ﬁnancial and economic cli-
mate of other countries. Capital ﬂows can be in the form of physical or
portfolio investments. In general, in developing countries, the composition
of capital ﬂows tends to be skewed toward foreign direct investment (FDI)
and bank loans. For developed countries, due to the strength of the equity
and ﬁxed income markets, stocks and bonds appear to be more important
than bank loans and FDI.
Equity Markets
Equity markets have a signiﬁcant impact on exchange
rate movements because they are a major place for high-volume cur-
rency movements. Their importance is considerable for the currencies
of countries with developed capital markets where great amounts of
capital inﬂows and outﬂows occur, and where foreign investors are major
participants. The amount of the foreign investment ﬂows in the equity
markets is dependent on the general health and growth of the market, re-
ﬂecting the well-being of companies and particular sectors. Movements of


--- PAGE 64 ---
48
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
currencies occur when foreign investors move their money to a particular
equity market. Thus they convert their capital in a domestic currency and
push the demand for it higher, making the currency appreciate. When the
equity markets are experiencing recessions, however, foreign investors
tend to ﬂee, thus converting back to their home currency and pushing the
domestic currency down.
Fixed Income (Bond) Markets
The effect the ﬁxed income markets
have on currencies is similar to that of the equity markets and is a result
of capital movements. The investor’s interest in the ﬁxed income market
depends on the company’s speciﬁcs and credit rating, as well as on the gen-
eral health of the economy and the country’s interest rates. The movement
of foreign capital into and out of ﬁxed income markets leads to change
in the demand and supply for currencies, hence impacting the currencies’
exchange rates.
Summary of Trade and Capital Flows
Determining and understand-
ing a country’s balance of payments is perhaps the most important and
useful tool for those interested in fundamental analysis. Any international
transaction gives rise to two offsetting entries, trade ﬂow balance (current
account) and capital ﬂow balance (capital account). If the trade ﬂow bal-
ance is a negative outﬂow, the country is buying more from foreigners than
it sells (imports exceed exports). When it is a positive inﬂow, the country
is selling more than it buys (exports exceed imports). The capital ﬂow bal-
ance is positive when foreign inﬂows of physical or portfolio investments
into a country exceed that country’s outﬂows. A capital ﬂow is negative
when a country buys more physical or portfolio investments than are sold
to foreign investors.
These two entries, trade and capital ﬂow, when added together signify
a country’s balance of payments. In theory, the two entries should balance
and add up to zero in order to provide for the maintenance of the status
quo in a nation’s economy and currency rates.
In general, countries might experience positive or negative trade, as
well as positive or negative capital ﬂow balances. In order to minimize the
net effect of the two on the exchange rates, a country should try to maintain
a balance between the two. For example, in the United States there is a
substantial trade deﬁcit, as more is imported than is exported. When the
trade balance is negative, the country is buying more from foreigners than
it sells and therefore it needs to ﬁnance its deﬁcit. This negative trade ﬂow
might be offset by a positive capital ﬂow into the country, as foreigners buy
either physical or portfolio investments. Therefore, the United States seeks
to minimize its trade deﬁcit and maximize its capital inﬂows to the extent
that the two balance out.


--- PAGE 65 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
49
A change in this balance is extremely signiﬁcant and carries ramiﬁca-
tions that run deep into economic policy and currency exchange levels.
The net result of the difference between the trade and capital ﬂows, pos-
itive or negative, will impact the direction in which the nation’s currency
will move. If the overall trade and capital balance is negative it will result
in a depreciation of the nation’s currency, and if positive it will lead to an
appreciation of the currency.
Clearly a change in the balance of payments carries a direct effect for
currency levels. It is therefore possible for any investor to observe eco-
nomic data relating to this balance and interpret the results that will occur.
Data relating to capital and trade ﬂows should be followed most closely.
For instance, if an analyst observes an increase in the U.S. trade deﬁcit and
a decrease in the capital ﬂows, a balance of payments deﬁcit would occur
and as a result an investor may anticipate a depreciation of the dollar.
Limitations of Balance of Payments Model
The BOP model fo-
cuses on traded goods and services while ignoring international capital
ﬂows. Indeed, international capital ﬂows often dwarfed trade ﬂows in the
currency markets toward the end of the 1990s, though, and this often bal-
anced the current accounts of debtor nations like the United States.
For example, in 1999, 2000, and 2001 the United States maintained a
large current account deﬁcit while the Japanese ran a large current account
surplus. However, during this same period the U.S. dollar rose against the
yen even though trade ﬂows were running against the dollar. The reason
was that capital ﬂows balanced trade ﬂows, thus defying the BOP’s fore-
casting model for a period of time. Indeed, the increase in capital ﬂows has
given rise to the asset market model.
Note: It is probably a misnomer to call this approach the balance of
payments theory since it takes into account only the current account bal-
ance, not the actual balance of payments. However, until the 1990s capital
ﬂows played a very small role in the world economy so the trade balance
made up the bulk of the balance of payments for most nations.
Purchasing Power Parity
The purchasing power parity theory is based on the belief that foreign ex-
change rates should be determined by the relative prices of a similar bas-
ket of goods between two countries. Any change in a nation’s inﬂation rate
should be balanced by an opposite change in that nation’s exchange rate.
Therefore, according to this theory, when a country’s prices are rising due
to inﬂation, that country’s exchange rate should depreciate in order to re-
turn to parity.


--- PAGE 66 ---
50
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
PPP’s Basket of Goods
The basket of goods and services priced
for the PPP exercise is a sample of all goods and services covered by
gross domestic product (GDP). It includes consumer goods and services,
government services, equipment goods, and construction projects. More
speciﬁcally, consumer items include food, beverages, tobacco, clothing,
footwear, rents, water supply, gas, electricity, medical goods and services,
furniture and furnishings, household appliances, personal transport equip-
ment, fuel, transport services, recreational equipment, recreational and
cultural services, telephone services, education services, goods and ser-
vices for personal care and household operation, and repair and mainte-
nance services.
Big Mac Index
One of the most famous examples of PPP is the
Economist’s Big Mac Index. The Big Mac PPP is the exchange rate that
would leave hamburgers costing the same in the United States as else-
where, comparing these with actual rates signals if a currency is under-
or overvalued. For example, in April 2002 the exchange rate between the
United States and Canada was 1.57. In the United States a Big Mac cost
$2.49. In Canada, a Big Mac cost $3.33 in local Canadian dollars (CAD),
which works out to only $2.12 in U.S. dollars. Therefore, the exchange rate
for USD/CAD is overvalued by 15 percent using this theory and should be
only 1.34.
OECD Purchasing Power Parity Index
A more formal index is put
out by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Un-
der a joint OECD-Eurostat PPP program, the OECD and Eurostat share
the responsibility for calculating PPPs. This latest information on which
currencies are under- or overvalued against the U.S. dollar can be found
on the OECD’s web site at www.oecd.org. The OECD publishes a table
that shows the price levels for the major industrialized countries. Each
column states the number of speciﬁed monetary units needed in each of
the countries listed to buy the same representative basket of consumer
goods and services. In each case the representative basket costs 100 units
in the country whose currency is speciﬁed. The chart that is then created
compares the PPP of a currency with its actual exchange rate. The chart
is updated weekly to reﬂect the current exchange rate. It is also updated
about twice a year to reﬂect new estimates of PPP. The PPP estimates are
taken from studies carried out by the OECD; however, they should not be
taken as deﬁnitive. Different methods of calculation will arrive at different
PPP rates.
According to the OECD information for September 2002, the exchange
rate between the United States and Canada was 1.58 while the price
level for the United States versus Canada was 122, which translates to an


--- PAGE 67 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
51
exchange rate of 1.22. Using this PPP model, the USD/CAD is once again
greatly overvalued (by over 25 percent, not that far away from the Big Mac
Index after all).
Limitations to Using Purchasing Power Parity
PPP theory should
be used only for long-term fundamental analysis. The economic forces
behind PPP will eventually equalize the purchasing power of currencies.
However, this can take many years. A time horizon of 5 to 10 years is
typical.
PPP’s major weakness is that it assumes goods can be traded easily,
without regard to such things as tariffs, quotas, or taxes. For example,
when the United States announces new tariffs on imports the cost of do-
mestic manufactured goods goes up; but those increases will not be re-
ﬂected in the U.S. PPP tables.
There are other factors that must also be considered when weighing
PPP: inﬂation, interest rate differentials, economic releases/reports, asset
markets, trade ﬂows, and political developments. Indeed, PPP is just one
of several theories traders should use when determining exchange rates.
Interest Rate Parity
The interest rate parity theory states that if two different currencies have
different interest rates then that difference will be reﬂected in the pre-
mium or discount for the forward exchange rate in order to prevent riskless
arbitrage.
For example, if U.S. interest rates are 3 percent and Japanese inter-
est rates are 1 percent, then the U.S. dollar should depreciate against the
Japanese yen by 2 percent in order to prevent riskless arbitrage. This future
exchange rate is reﬂected into the forward exchange rate stated today. In
our example, the forward exchange rate of the dollar is said to be at dis-
count because it buys fewer Japanese yen in the forward rate than it does
in the spot rate. The yen is said to be at a premium.
Interest rate parity has shown very little proof of working in recent
years. Often currencies with higher interest rates rise due to the determina-
tion of central bankers trying to slow down a booming economy by hiking
rates and have nothing to do with riskless arbitrage.
Monetary Model
The monetary model holds that exchange rates are determined by a na-
tion’s monetary policy. Countries that follow a stable monetary policy
over time usually have appreciating currencies according to the monetary
model. Countries that have erratic monetary policies or excessively expan-
sionist policies should see the value of their currency depreciate.


--- PAGE 68 ---
52
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
How to Use the Monetary Model
There are several factors that inﬂu-
ence exchange rates under this theory:
1. A nation’s money supply.
2. Expected future levels of a nation’s money supply.
3. The growth rate of a nation’s money supply.
All of these factors are key to understanding and spotting a monetary
trend that may force a change in exchange rates. For example, the Japanese
economy has been slipping in and out of recession for over a decade. In-
terest rates are near zero, and annual budget deﬁcits prevent the Japanese
from spending their way out of recession, which leaves only one tool left
at the disposal of Japanese ofﬁcials determined to revive their economy:
printing more money. By buying stocks and bonds, the Bank of Japan is in-
creasing the nation’s money supply, which produces inﬂation, which forces
a change in the exchange rate. The example in Figure 3.5 illustrates the ef-
fect of money supply changes using the monetary model.
Indeed, it is in the area of excessive expansionary monetary policy that
the monetary model is most successful. One of the few ways a country can
keep its currency from sharply devaluing is by pursuing a tight monetary
policy. For example, during the Asian currency crisis the Hong Kong dollar
came under attack from speculators. Hong Kong ofﬁcials raised interest
rates to 300 percent to halt the Hong Kong dollar from being dislodged
from its peg to the U.S. dollar. The tactic worked perfectly as speculators
were cleared out by such sky-high interest rates. The downside was the
danger that the Hong Kong economy would slide into recession. But in the
end the peg held and the monetary model worked.
Limitations of Monetary Model
Very few economists solely stand by
this model anymore since it does not take into account trade ﬂows and cap-
ital ﬂows. For example, throughout 2002 the United Kingdom had higher
interest rates, growth rates, and inﬂation rates than both the United States
and the European Union, yet the pound appreciated in value against both
FIGURE 3.5
Monetary Model


--- PAGE 69 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
53
the dollar and the euro. Indeed, the monetary model has greatly struggled
since the dawn of freely ﬂoating currencies. The model holds that high in-
terest rates signal growing inﬂation, which they often do, followed by a
depreciating currency. But this does not take into account the capital in-
ﬂows that would take effect as a result of higher interest yields or of an
equity market that may be thriving in a booming economy—thus causing
the currency to possibly appreciate.
In any case, the monetary model is one of several useful fundamental
tools that can be employed in tandem with other models to determine the
direction an exchange rate is heading.
Real Interest Rate Differential Model
The real interest rate differential theory states that exchange rate move-
ments are determined by a nation’s interest rate level. Countries that have
high interest rates should see their currencies appreciate in value, while
countries with low interest rates should see their currencies depreciate in
value.
Basics of the Model
Once a nation raises its interest rates, interna-
tional investors will discover that the yield for that nation’s currency is
more attractive and hence buy up that nation’s currency. Figure 3.6 shows
how well this theory held up in 2003 when interest rate spreads were near
their widest levels in recent years.
The data from this graph shows a mixed result. The Australian dollar
had the largest basis point spread and also had the highest return against
the U.S. dollar, which seems to vindicate the model as investors bought up
higher-yielding Aussie currency. The same can be said for the New Zealand
dollar, which also had a higher yield than the U.S. dollar and gained 27 per-
cent against USD. Yet the model becomes less convincing when compar-
ing the euro, which gained 20 percent against the dollar (more than every
currency except NZD) even though its basis point differential was only
100 points. The model then comes under serious question when compar-
ing the British pound and the Japanese yen. The yen differential is –100
and yet it appreciates almost 12 percent against the dollar. Meanwhile, the
British pound gained only 11 percent against the dollar even though it had
a whopping 275-point interest rate differential.
This model also stresses that one of the key factors in determining the
severity of an exchange rate’s response to a shift in interest rates is the
expected persistence of that shift. Simply put, a rise in interest rates that
is expected to last for ﬁve years will have a much larger impact on the
exchange rate than if that rise were expected to last for only one year.


--- PAGE 70 ---
54
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 3.6
Real Interest Rate Model
Limitations to Interest Rate Model
There is a great deal of de-
bate among international economists over whether there is a strong and
statistically signiﬁcant link between changes in a nation’s interest rate
and currency price. The main weakness of this model is that it does not
take into account a nation’s current account balance, relying on capital
ﬂows instead. Indeed, the model tends to overemphasize capital ﬂows
at the expense of numerous other factors: political stability, inﬂation,
economic growth, and so on. Absent these types of factors, the model
can be very useful since it is quite logical to conclude that an investor
will naturally gravitate toward the investment vehicle that pays a higher
reward.
Asset Market Model
The basic premise of this theory is that the ﬂow of funds into other ﬁnancial
assets of a country such as equities and bonds increases the demand for
that country’s currency (and vice versa). As proof, advocates point out that
the amount of funds that are placed in investment products such as stocks
and bonds now dwarf the amount of funds that are exchanged as a result of
the transactions in goods and services for import and export purposes. The
asset market theory is basically the opposite of the balance of payments


--- PAGE 71 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
55
theory since it takes into account a nation’s capital account instead of its
current account.
A Dollar-Driven Theory
Throughout 1999, many experts argued that
the dollar would fall against the euro on the grounds of the expanding U.S.
current account deﬁcit and an overvalued Wall Street. That was based on
the rationale that non-U.S. investors would begin withdrawing their funds
from U.S. stocks and bonds into more economically sound markets, which
would weigh signiﬁcantly on the dollar. Yet such fears have lingered since
the early 1980s when the U.S. current account soared to a record high at
the time of 3.5 percent of GDP.
Throughout the past two decades, the balance of payments approach
in assessing the dollar’s behavior has given way to the asset market
approach. This theory continues to hold the most sway over pundits due
to the enormity of U.S. capital markets. In May and June of 2002 the dollar
plummeted more than a thousand points versus the yen at the same time
equity investors ﬂed U.S. equity markets due to the accounting scandals
that were plaguing Wall Street. As the scandals subsided toward the end
of 2002 the dollar rose 500 basis points from a low of 115.43 to close at
120.00 against the yen even though the current account balance remained
in massive deﬁcit the entire time.
Limitations to Asset Market Theory
The main limitation of the as-
set market theory is that it is untested and fairly new. It is frequently argued
that over the long run there is no relationship between a nation’s equity
market performance and the performance of its currency. See Figure 3.7
for a comparison. Between 1998 and 2008, the S&P 500 index and the U.S.
Dollar Index had a correlation of only 25 percent.
Also, what happens to a nation’s currency when the stock market is
trading sideways, stuck between bullish and bearish sentiments? That was
the scenario in the United States for much of 2002, and currency traders
found themselves going back to older moneymaking models, such as inter-
est rate arbitrage, as a result. Only time will tell whether the asset market
model will hold up or merely be a short-term blip on the currency forecast-
ing radar.
Currency Substitution Model
This currency substitution model is a continuation of the monetary model
since it takes into account a nation’s investor ﬂows. It posits that the shift-
ing of private and public portfolios from one nation to another can have
a signiﬁcant effect on exchange rates. The ability of individuals to change
their assets from domestic and foreign currencies is known as currency


--- PAGE 72 ---
56
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 3.7
Dollar Index and S&P 500
substitution. When this model is added to the monetary model, evidence
shows that shifts in expectations of a nation’s money supply can have a de-
cided impact on that nation’s exchange rates. Investors are looking at mon-
etary model data and coming to the conclusion that a change in money ﬂow
is about to occur, thus changing the exchange rate, so they are investing ac-
cordingly, which turns the monetary model into a self-fulﬁlling prophecy.
Investors who subscribe to this theory are merely jumping on the currency
substitution model bandwagon on the way to the monetary model party.
Yen Example
In the monetary model example we showed that by
buying stocks and bonds in the marketplace the Japanese government
was basically printing yen (increasing the money supply). Monetary
model theorists would conclude this monetary growth would in fact spark
inﬂation (more yen chasing fewer products), decrease demand for the yen,
and ﬁnally cause the yen to depreciate across the board. A currency substi-
tution theorist would agree with this scenario and look to take advantage
of this by shorting the yen or, if long the yen, by promptly getting out of
the position. By taking this action, our yen trader is helping to drive the
market precisely in that direction thus making the monetary model theory
a fait accompli. The step-by-step process is illustrated in Figure 3.8.


--- PAGE 73 ---
What Moves the Currency Market in the Long Term?
57
FIGURE 3.8
Currency Substitution Model
A. Japan announces a new stock and bond buyback plan. Economists are
now predicting Japan’s money supply will dramatically increase.
B. Economists are also predicting a rise in inﬂation with the introduction
of this new policy. Speculators expect a change in the exchange rate
as a result.
C. Economists expect interest rates to rise also as inﬂation takes hold in
the economy. Speculators start shorting the yen in anticipation of a
change in the exchange rate.
D. Demand for the yen plummets as money ﬂows easily through the
Japanese economy and speculators dump yen in the markets.
E. The exchange rate for Japanese yen changes dramatically as the yen
falls in value to foreign currencies, especially those that are easily sub-
stituted by investors (read: liquid yen crosses).
Limitations of Currency Substitution Model
Among the major,
actively traded currencies this model has not yet shown itself to be a con-
vincing, single determinant for exchange rate movements. While this the-
ory can be used with more conﬁdence in underdeveloped countries where
hot money rushes in and out of emerging markets with enormous effect,
there are still too many variables not accounted for by the currency substi-
tution model. For example, using the earlier yen illustration, even though
Japan may try to spark inﬂation with its securities buyback plan, it still
has an enormous current account surplus that will continually prop up the
yen. Also, Japan has numerous political land mines it must avoid in its own
neighborhood, and should Japan make it clear it is trying to devalue its cur-
rency there will be enormous repercussions. These are just two of many
factors the substitution model does not take into consideration. However,
this model (like numerous other currency models) should be considered
part of an overall balanced FX forecasting diet.


--- PAGE 74 ---


--- PAGE 75 ---
C H A P T E R 4
What Moves the
Market in the
Short Term?
F
or fundamental or technical traders, the importance of economic
data cannot be underestimated. Even though there are many peo-
ple who claim to be pure technicians, through my years in the FX
market, I have to come to realize that nearly everyone will factor economic
data into their trading strategies. A good technician who focuses on range
trades, for example, may choose to stay out of the markets on the day that
a very market-moving number such as nonfarm payrolls (NFP) will be re-
leased. A technical breakout trader, by contrast, may want to trade only on
days when there is important economic data to drive some sizable price ac-
tion. Incorporating fundamental analysis is particularly important for peo-
ple who trade automated systems, because turning on or off their strategies
based on incoming economic data can potentially have a big impact on the
overall performance of the trading strategy. Fundamental traders naturally
tend to thrive on economic releases, and the economic data that tend to
have the biggest impact on currency rates are U.S. data. Close to 90 per-
cent of all currency transactions are done against the U.S. dollar, which
means that the greenback is either the base or counter currency for most
transactions.
NOT ALL ECONOMIC RELEASES ARE
CREATED EQUAL
Some economic data releases can have a very signiﬁcant and lasting impact
on a currency, while others may not matter at all. In the ﬁrst edition of Day
Trading the Currency Market (John Wiley & Sons, 2005), I looked at how
59


--- PAGE 76 ---
60
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
various pieces of U.S. economic data impacted the dollar (against the euro)
in 2004. I chose the EUR/USD because it is the most liquid currency pair in
the world and tends to have the purest reaction to U.S. numbers. For this
second edition, entitled Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency
Market, the study is updated using 2007 data. Not only have the rankings
changed, but so have the magnitudes of the reactions.
For the purposes of this study, I looked at how the EUR/USD reacted to
various economic releases 20 minutes after the number was released and
60 minutes or one hour after the number was released, and whether the
move lasted into the end of the U.S. trading session. I consider 20 minutes
the knee-jerk reaction time, and the pip change is based on the time at
which the economic number is released and the closing price 20 minutes
or 60 minutes later. This methodology may help exclude some wild swings
within the ﬁrst 20 minutes, for example.
As indicated in Table 4.1, the U.S. nonfarm payrolls release remains the
number-one most market-moving indicator for the U.S. dollar; it topped
the list in both 2004 and 2007. The reason why NFP is so important is
because job growth has broad ramiﬁcations for any country. Strong job
growth tends to lead to stronger consumer spending and tighter monetary
policies. Weak job growth can lead to weaker retail sales, a slowing econ-
omy, and lower interest rates. Throughout 2007, on average, the EUR/USD
would move 69 pips (points in FX) in the ﬁrst 20 minutes following the NFP
release. On a daily basis, the EUR/USD moved an average of 98 pips.
The magnitude of the reaction to nonfarm payrolls, or to any U.S.
economic data for that matter, has fallen signiﬁcantly between 2004 and
2007. This has partially been due to the declining volatility in the currency
market; in 2006, FX volatility actually hit a record low. The liquidity in
the market has also increased signiﬁcantly, with volume in the FX market
TABLE 4.1
MSRange of EUR/USD Following Economic Releases
Top Indicators of 2007 (20-Minute
Reactions)
Top Indicators of 2004 (20-Minute
Reactions)
1
Nonfarm Payrolls
69 pips
1
Nonfarm Payrolls
2
Interest Rates (FOMC)
57 pips
2
Interest Rates (FOMC)
3
Inﬂation (CPI)
39 pips
3
Trade Balance
4
Retail Sales
35 pips
4
Inﬂation (CPI)
5
Producer Price Index
35 pips
5
Retail Sales
6
New Home Sales
34 pips
6
Foreign Purchases U.S. Treasuries (TIC)
7
Existing Home Sales
34 pips
7
ISM Manufacturing
8
Durable Goods Orders
33 pips
8
Producer Price Index
9
GDP Release
32 pips
9
GDP Release


--- PAGE 77 ---
What Moves the Market in the Short Term?
61
close to doubling over the past three years. With greater liquidity, the
market tends to do a better job of absorbing the economic release.
On the other side of the spectrum is the gross domestic product (GDP)
report, which resulted in an average move of 32 pips in 2007 compared to
43 pips in 2004. On a daily basis, the reaction to GDP in 2007 was less
than 90 pips, which mean that it did not even make it onto our list of most
market-moving indicators for the U.S. dollar. Back in 2004, the average
daily move in EUR/USD after the GDP release was 110 pips.
One of the biggest changes that we have seen over the past few years is
the fact that knee-jerk reactions are more tempered. In 2004, we used to see
a lot of knee-jerk spikes followed by retracements. Oftentimes this made
the reaction to U.S. economic data in the ﬁrst 20 minutes larger than the
end-of-day reaction. In 2007, however, we saw smaller knee-jerk reactions
and longer follow-through. One of the main reasons for this difference may
have been the fact that the Federal Reserve was lowering interest rates in
2007. Therefore, traders needed to better assess the ramiﬁcations of the
economic release for the Fed’s next monetary policy decision. According
to our own analysis of 20-minute and daily reactions, we have created the
following rankings for U.S. economic data:
Top Market-Moving Indicators for the U.S. Dollar (Based on
2007 Data)
First 20 Minutes:
1. Nonfarm Payrolls
2. Interest Rates (FOMC Rate Decision)
3. Inﬂation (Consumer Prices)
4. Retail Sales
5. Producer Prices
6. New Home Sales
7. Existing Home Sales
8. Durable Goods Orders
9. Gross Domestic Product
Daily:
1. Nonfarm Payrolls
2. ISM Nonmanufacturing
3. Personal Spending
4. Inﬂation (Consumer Prices)


--- PAGE 78 ---
62
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
5. Existing Home Sales
6. Consumer Conﬁdence (Conference Board)
7. University of Michigan Consumer Conﬁdence
8. FOMC Minutes
9. Industrial Production
It is also interesting to point out that the nonmanufacturing ISM re-
port appears prominently on the daily list and not at all on the 20-minute
list. With a number of underlying components, there is always more than
meets the eye when it comes to the ISM report. Traders need to look at
both the employment and price components to determine which way the
Federal Reserve may lean next. Service-sector ISM is extremely important
nonetheless, because the employment component of the report is a very
good leading indicator for the direction of nonfarm payrolls.
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC
DATA CHANGES WITH TIME
As the world changes with time, so does the signiﬁcance of the various eco-
nomic releases. Between 2004 and 2007 alone, different economic indica-
tors have appeared on our top indicators list. For example, in 2004 no one
really gave a second thought to housing market numbers, because the real
estate market was booming and everyone expected this boom to continue
forever. By 2007, however, the housing market bubble had burst and its
problems had spread throughout the U.S. and global economies. Not only
were house prices falling and inventory rising, but more and more home-
owners were pushed into defaulting on their mortgages. This made the
health of the housing market critical to the outlook for the U.S. economy.
Everyone realized that for the U.S. economy to recover, the housing mar-
ket would need to stabilize. Therefore, traders began to react more to the
monthly existing home sales numbers than to the balance of trade report.
Interestingly enough, according to a National Bureau of Economic Re-
search (NBER) working paper titled “Macroeconomic Implications of the
Beliefs and Behavior of Foreign Exchange Traders,” by Yin-Wong Cheung
and Menzie D. Chinn, in 1992 the trade balance was actually the most
market-moving indicator for the U.S. dollar in the ﬁrst 20 minutes of the
release. At that time, the nonfarm payrolls release was third. In 1999, un-
employment or nonfarm payrolls took the top place while the trade balance
fell to fourth. As indicated by Table 4.1, the nonfarm payrolls report contin-
ues to be the most market-moving release for the U.S. dollar, and the trade
balance has completely fallen off the radar screen for many traders.


--- PAGE 79 ---
What Moves the Market in the Short Term?
63
Intuitively, it makes sense that the market will shift its attention
to different economic data and sectors of the U.S. economy based on
the changes in the economy. For example, trade balances may be more
important when a country is running unsustainable trade deﬁcits, whereas
an economy that is having difﬁculties creating jobs will see unemployment
data as more important. It is all about putting yourself in the shoes of
the central bank governor and thinking about what problems are most
pressing.
FX Dealer Ranking of the Importance of Economic Data:
Changes over Time
As of 2007
As of 1992
1. Nonfarm Payrolls
(Unemployment)
2. Interest Rates (FOMC Rate
Decisions)
3. Inﬂation (Consumer Prices)
4. Retail Sales
5. Producer Prices
1. Trade Balance
2. Interest Rates (FOMC Rate
Decisions)
3. Nonfarm Payrolls
(Unemployment)
4. Inﬂation
5. GDP
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT—NO
LONGER A BIG DEAL
Contrary to popular belief, the GDP report is no longer a very market-
moving indicator for the U.S. dollar. One possible explanation is that GDP
is released less frequently than other data used in the study (quarterly ver-
sus monthly), but the GDP data is also more prone to ambiguity and mis-
interpretation. For example, surging GDP brought about by rising exports
will be positive for the home currency; however, if GDP growth is a result
of inventory buildup, the effect on the currency may actually be negative.
In addition, many of the components that comprise the GDP report are
known in advance of the release.
HOW CAN YOU USE THIS TO
YOUR BENEFIT?
For breakout traders, the knowledge of which data are being released on
the day you place the trade can help to determine the size and conﬁdence


--- PAGE 80 ---
64
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
of the trade. For example, in the daily EUR/USD chart shown in Figure 4.1,
we see a triangle forming as prices consolidate. If the nonfarm payrolls re-
port was expected the next day (which it was), a breakout trader would
probably overweight positions on the eve prior in anticipation of a large
breakout following the release. In contrast, the third bar of the consolida-
tion was the day of the GDP release. As you can see, the range was still
comparatively tight despite the fact that a breakout appeared imminent.
Given the knowledge that the average instantaneous 20-minute move af-
ter the GDP release is not even comparable to the nonfarm payrolls move,
the same breakout players hoping for a large move off of that economic
release should probably put on only 50 percent of the same position that
they would have taken if NFP was set to be released. The same guidelines
apply for range traders or system traders. Nonfarm payrolls day would be a
perfect time to stand on the sidelines and wait for prices to settle, whereas
the day that GDP is being released could still provide an opportunity for
solid range- or system-based trading.
Overall, knowing what economic indicator moves the market the most
is extremely important for all traders. Knowing the 20-minute versus daily
range is also very important, because it tells you which pieces of economic
data will cause knee-jerk reactions and which pieces of data will have more
lasting reactions in the currency market. It is also critical to stay abreast
(EUR.A0-FX - Euro.D) Dynamic, 0:00-24:00
1.2800
1.2735
1.2700
1.2600
1.2500
1.2400
1.2300
1.2200
1.2100
1.2000
7     14   21   28   5      12   19    26   2     9     16    23   30   6     13   20   27   4      11   18   25  
FIGURE 4.1
EUR/USD Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 81 ---
What Moves the Market in the Short Term?
65
of which data the market deems important at any point in time, because as
the market is cyclical, so is the economic data that traders will focus on.
RESOURCE
Yin-Wong Cheung and Menzie D. Chinn, “Macroeconomic Implications
of the Beliefs and Behavior of Foreign Exchange Traders,” NBER
Working Paper 7417, November 1999 (www.georgetown.edu/faculty/
evansm1/New%20Micro/chinn.pdf).


--- PAGE 82 ---


--- PAGE 83 ---
C H A P T E R 5
What Are the
Best Times to
Trade for
Individual
Currency Pairs?
T
he foreign exchange market operates 24 hours a day and as a result
it is impossible for a trader to track every single market movement
and make an immediate response at all times. Timing is everything in
currency trading. In order to devise an effective and time-efﬁcient invest-
ment strategy, it is important to note the amount of market activity around
the clock in order to maximize the number of trading opportunities during
a trader’s own market hours. Besides liquidity, a currency pair’s trading
range is also heavily dependent on geographical location and macroeco-
nomic factors. Knowing what time of day a currency pair has the widest
or narrowest trading range will undoubtedly help traders improve their in-
vestment utility due to better capital allocation. This chapter outlines the
typical trading activity of major currency pairs in different time zones to
see when they are the most volatile. Table 5.1 tabulates the average pip
range for the different currency pairs during various time frames between
2002 and 2004.
ASIAN SESSION (TOKYO):
7 P.M.–4 A.M. EST
FX trading in Asia is conducted in major regional ﬁnancial hubs; during the
Asian trading session, Tokyo takes the largest market share, followed by
Hong Kong and Singapore. Despite the ﬂagging inﬂuence of the Japanese
central bank on the FX market, Tokyo remains one of the most important
dealing centers in Asia. It is the ﬁrst major Asian market to open, and many
large participants often use the trade momentum there as the benchmark to
67


--- PAGE 84 ---
TABLE 5.1
Currency Pair Ranges
Asian Session
European Session
U.S. Session
U.S. & Europe Overlap
Europe & Asia Overlap
Currency Pairs (EST)
7 P.M.–4 A.M.
2 A.M.–12 A.M.
8 A.M.–5 P.M.
8 A.M.–12 P.M.
2 A.M.–4 A.M.
EUR/USD
51
87
78
65
32
USD/JPY
78
79
69
58
29
GBP/USD
65
112
94
78
43
USD/CHF
68
117
107
88
43
EUR/CHF
53
53
49
40
24
AUD/USD
38
53
47
39
20
USD/CAD
47
94
84
74
28
NZD/USD
42
52
46
38
20
EUR/GBP
25
40
34
27
16
GBP/JPY
112
145
119
99
60
GBP/CHF
96
150
129
105
62
AUD/JPY
55
63
56
47
26
68


--- PAGE 85 ---
What Are the Best Times to Trade for Individual Currency Pairs?
69
gauge market dynamics as well as to devise their trading strategies. Trading
in Tokyo can be thin from time to time; but large investment banks and
hedge funds are known to try to use the Asian session to run important
stop and option barrier levels. Figure 5.1 provides a ranking of the different
currency pairs and their ranges during the Asian trading session.
For the more risk-tolerant traders, USD/JPY, GBP/CHF, and GBP/JPY
are good picks because their broad ranges provide short-term traders with
lucrative proﬁt potentials, averaging 90 pips. Foreign investment banks and
institutional investors, which hold mostly dollar-dominated assets, gen-
erate a signiﬁcant amount of USD/JPY transactions when they enter the
Japanese equity and bond markets. Japan’s central bank, with more than
$800 billion of U.S. Treasury securities, also plays an inﬂuential role in af-
fecting the supply and demand of USD/JPY through its open market op-
erations. Last but not least, large Japanese exporters are known to use
the Tokyo trading hours to repatriate their foreign earnings, heightening
the ﬂuctuation of the currency pair. GBP/CHF and GBP/JPY remain highly
volatile as central bankers and large players start to scale themselves into
positions in anticipation of the opening of the European session.
For the more risk-averse traders, AUD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF
are good choices because they allow medium-term to long-term traders to
take fundamental factors into account when making a decision. The mod-
erate volatility of the currency pairs will help to shield traders and their in-
vestment strategies from being prone to irregular market movements due
to intraday speculative trades.
FIGURE 5.1
Asian Session Volatility


--- PAGE 86 ---
70
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
U.S. SESSION (NEW YORK):
8 A.M.–5 P.M. EST
New York is the second largest FX marketplace, encompassing 19 percent
of total FX market volume turnover according to the 2004 Triennial Central
Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April
2004, published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). It is also
the ﬁnancial center that guards the back door of the world’s FX market
as trading activity usually winds down to a minimum from its afternoon
session until the opening of the Tokyo market the next day. The majority
of the transactions during the U.S. session are executed between 8 a.m. and
noon, a period with high liquidity because European traders are still in the
market.
For the more risk-tolerant traders, GBP/USD, USD/CHF, GBP/JPY, and
GBP/CHF are good choices for day traders since the daily ranges average
about 120 pips. (See Figure 5.2.) Trading activities in these currency pairs
are particularly active because these transactions directly involve the U.S.
dollar. When the U.S. equity and bond markets are open during the U.S.
session, foreign investors have to convert their domestic currency, such
as the Japanese yen, the euro, and the Swiss franc, into dollar-dominated
assets in order to carry out their transactions. With the market overlap,
GBP/JPY and GBP/CHF have the widest daily ranges.
FIGURE 5.2
U.S. Session Volatility


--- PAGE 87 ---
What Are the Best Times to Trade for Individual Currency Pairs?
71
Most currencies in the FX market are quoted with the U.S. dollar
as the base and primarily traded against it before translating into other
currencies. In the GBP/JPY case, for a British pound to be converted
into Japanese yen, it has to be traded against the dollar ﬁrst, then into
yen. Therefore, a GBP/JPY trade involves two different currency transac-
tions, GBP/USD and USD/JPY, and its volatility is ultimately determined
by the correlations of the two derived currency pairs. Since GBP/USD
and USD/JPY have negative correlations, which means their direction of
movements are opposite to each other, the volatility of GBP/JPY is thus
ampliﬁed. USD/CHF movement can also be explained similarly but has a
greater intensity. Trading currency pairs with high volatility can be very
lucrative, but it is also important to bear in mind that the risk involved
is very high as well. Traders should continuously revise their strategies
in response to market conditions because abrupt movements in exchange
rates can easily stop out their trading orders or nullify their long-term
strategies.
For the more risk-averse traders, USD/JPY, EUR/USD, and USD/CAD
appear to be good choices since these pairs offer traders a decent amount
of trading range to garner handsome proﬁts with a smaller amount of risk.
Their highly liquid nature allows an investor to secure proﬁts or cut losses
promptly and efﬁciently. The modest volatility of these pairs also pro-
vides a favorable environment for traders who want to pursue long-term
strategies.
EUROPEAN SESSION (LONDON):
2 A.M.–12 P.M. EST
London is the largest and most important dealing center in the world, with
a market share at more than 30 percent according to the BIS survey. Most
of the dealing desks of large banks are located in London; the majority of
major FX transactions are completed during London hours due to the mar-
ket’s high liquidity and efﬁciency. The vast number of market participants
and their high transaction value make London the most volatile FX market
of all. As shown in Figure 5.3, half of the 12 major pairs surpass the 80 pips
line, the benchmark that we used to identify volatile pairs with GBP/JPY
and GBP/CHF reaching as high as 140 and 146 pips respectively.
GBP/JPY and GBP/CHF are apt for the risk lovers. These two pairs
have an average daily range of more than 140 pips and can be used to gen-
erate a huge amount of proﬁts in a short period of time. Such high volatility
for the two pairs reﬂects the peak of daily trade activity as large partic-
ipants are about to complete their cycle of currency conversion around


--- PAGE 88 ---
72
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 5.3
European Session Volatility
the world. London hours are directly connected to both the U.S. and the
Asian sessions; as soon as large banks and institutional investors are ﬁn-
ished repositioning their portfolios, they will need to start converting the
European assets into dollar-denominated ones again in anticipation of the
opening of the U.S. market. The combination of the two reconversions
by the big players is the major reason for the extremely high volatility in
the pairs.
For the more risk-tolerant traders, there are plenty of pairs to choose
from. EUR/USD, USD/CAD, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF, with an average
range of 100 pips, are ideal picks as their high volatilities offer an abun-
dance of opportunity to enter the market. As mentioned earlier, trade be-
tween the European currencies and the dollar picks up again because the
large participants have to reshufﬂe their portfolios for the opening of the
U.S. session.
For the more risk-averse participants, the NZD/USD, AUD/USD, EUR/
CHF, and AUD/JPY, with an average of about 50 pips, are good choices
as these pairs provide traders with high interest incomes in additional to
potential trade proﬁts. These pairs allow investors to determine their di-
rection of movements based on fundamental economic factors and be less
prone to losses due to intraday speculative trades.


--- PAGE 89 ---
What Are the Best Times to Trade for Individual Currency Pairs?
73
U.S.–EUROPEAN OVERLAP:
8 A.M.–12 P.M. EST
The FX markets tend to be most active when the hours of the world’s two
largest trading centers overlap. (See Figure 5.4.) The range of trading be-
tween 8 a.m. and noon EST constitutes on average 70 percent of the total
average range of trading for all of the currency pairs during the European
trading hours and 80 percent of the total average range of trading for all of
the currency pairs during U.S. trading hours. Just these percentages alone
tell day traders that if they are really looking for volatile price action and
wide ranges and cannot sit at the screen all day, the time to trade is the
U.S. and European overlap.
EUROPEAN–ASIAN OVERLAP:
2 A.M.–4 A.M. EST
The trade intensity in the European–Asian overlap is far lower than in
any other session because of the slow trading during the Asian morning.
(See Figure 5.5) Of course, the time period surveyed is relatively smaller
as well. With trading extremely thin during these hours, risk-tolerant and
risk-loving traders can take a two-hour nap or spend the time positioning
themselves for a breakout move at the European or U.S. open.
FIGURE 5.4
U.S.–European Overlap


--- PAGE 90 ---
74
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 5.5
European–Asian Overlap


--- PAGE 91 ---
C H A P T E R 6
What Are
Currency
Correlations and
How Do Traders
Use Them?
W
hen trading the FX market, one of the most important facts to
remember is that the price action of each currency pair is not
mutually exclusive. In many cases, foreign economic conditions,
interest rates, and price changes affect much more than just a single pair-
ing. Everything is interrelated in the forex market to some extent, and
knowing the direction and how strong this relationship is can be used to
develop effective trading strategies and has the potential to be a great trad-
ing tool. The bottom line is that unless you only want to trade one currency
pair at a time, it is extremely important to take into account how differ-
ent currency pairs move relative to one another. To do this, we can use
correlation analysis.
Correlations are calculations based on pricing data, and these num-
bers can help gauge the relationships that exist between different currency
pairs. The information that the numbers give us can be a good aid for any
traders who want to diversify their portfolios, double up on positions with-
out investing in the same currency pair, or just get an idea of how much
risk their trades are opening them up to. If used correctly, this method has
the potential to maximize gains, gauge exposure, and help prevent coun-
terproductive trading.
75


--- PAGE 92 ---
76
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
POSITIVE/NEGATIVE CORRELATIONS:
WHAT THEY MEAN AND HOW TO
USE THEM
Knowing how closely correlated the currency pairs are in your portfolio is
a great way to measure your exposure and risk. You might think that you’re
diversifying your portfolio by investing in different pairs, but many of them
have a tendency to move in the same or opposite direction to one another.
The correlations between pairs can be strong or weak and last for weeks,
months, or even years. Basically, what a correlation number gives us is an
estimate of how closely pairs move together or how opposite their actions
are over a speciﬁed period of time. Any correlation calculation will be in
decimal form; the closer the number is to 1, the stronger the connection
between the two currencies. For example, by looking at the sample data
in Table 6.1, we can see a +0.83 correlation between the USD/JPY and the
USD/CHF currency pairs over the past month. If you are not a fan of deci-
mals, you can also think of the number as a percentage by multiplying it by
100 percent (in this case getting a 83 percent correlation between USD/JPY
and USD/CHF).
High decimals indicate currency pairs that closely mirror one another,
whereas lower numbers tell us that the pairs do not usually move in a par-
allel fashion. Therefore, because there is a high correlation between these
two currency pairs, we can see that by investing in both the USD/JPY and
the USD/CHF, we are effectively doubling up on a position. Likewise, it
might not be the best idea to go long one of the currency pairs and short
the other, because a rally in one has a high likelihood of also setting off a
rally in the other. While this would not make your proﬁt and losses exactly
zero (because they have different pip values), the two do move in such a
similar fashion that taking opposing positions could take a bite out of prof-
its or even cause losses.
Positive correlations aren’t the only way to measure similarities be-
tween pairings; negative correlations can be just as useful. In this case,
instead of a very positive number, we are looking for a highly negative one.
Just as on the positive side, the closer the number is to –1, the more
connected the two currencies movements are, this time in the opposite
direction. Let’s take a look at the EUR/USD, which has a very negative re-
lationship with the USD/CHF. Between these two currency pairs, the cor-
relation has been –0.83 over the past year and –0.94 over the past month.
This number indicates that these two pairings have a strong propensity to
move in opposite directions. Therefore, taking contrary positions on the
two pairs could be the same as taking the same position on two highly pos-
itive correlated pairs. In this case, going long in one and shorting the other
would be almost the same as doubling up on the position and as a result


--- PAGE 93 ---
What Are Currency Correlations and How Do Traders Use Them?
77
would also open your portfolio up to a higher amount of risk. However,
going long or short on both at the same time would probably be counter-
productive and lead to near zero proﬁt and losses, because the two cur-
rency pairs move in opposite directions. Therefore, if one side of the trade
became proﬁtable, the other would usually result in losses.
IMPORTANT FACT ABOUT
CORRELATIONS: THEY CHANGE
Anyone who has ever traded the FX market knows that currencies are very
dynamic; economic conditions, both sentiment and pricing, change every
day. Because of this, the most important aspect to remember when analyz-
ing currency correlations is that they can also easily change over time. The
strong correlations that are calculated today might not be the same this
time next month. Due to the constant reshaping of the forex environment,
it is imperative to keep current if you decide to use this method for trad-
ing. For example, over a one-month period that we observed, the correla-
tion between AUD/USD and GBP/USD was 0.08. This is a very low number
and would indicate that the pairs do not really share any deﬁnitive trend in
their movements. However, if we look at the three-month data for the same
time period, the number increases to 0.24 and then to 0.41 for six months
and ﬁnally to 0.45 for a year. Therefore, for this particular example we can
see that there was a blatant recent breakdown in the relationship between
these two pairs. What was once a stronger positive association in the long
run has almost totally deteriorated over the short term. In contrast, the
EUR/USD and AUD/USD pairing has shown a strengthening trend in the
most recent data. The correlation between these two pairs started at –0.52
for the year and edged up to –0.63 for the past month.
An even more dramatic example of the extent to which these num-
bers can change can be found in the USD/JPY and AUD/USD pairing; there
was a +0.41 correlation between the two for the yearlong data. However,
while these two tended to move in reasonably similar directions in the long
term, over the month of April 2008 they were actually negatively correlated
with a –0.30 reading. The major events that change the degree and even di-
rection that pairs are correlated are usually associated with the economic
developments and market sentiment at the time.
CALCULATING CORRELATIONS
YOURSELF
Because correlations have a tendency to shift over time, the best way to
keep current on the direction and strength of your pairings is to calculate


--- PAGE 94 ---
78
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
them yourself. Although it might seem like a tricky concept, the actual pro-
cess can be made quite easy. The simplest way to calculate the numbers
is to use Microsoft Excel. In Excel, you can take the currency pairs that
you want to derive a correlation from over a speciﬁc time period and just
use the correlation function. Taking the one-year, six-month, three-month,
and one-month trailing readings gives the most comprehensive view of the
similarities and differences between pairs; however, you can decide which
or how many of these readings you want to analyze. Breaking down the
process step-by-step, we’ll ﬁnd the correlation between the USD/GBP and
the USD/CHF.
First you’ll need to get the pricing data for the two pairings. To keep
organized, label one column GBP and the other CHF and then put in the
weekly values of these currencies using the last price and pairing them
with the USD for whatever time period you want to use. At the bottom
of the two columns, go to an empty slot and type in =CORREL. Highlight
all of the data in one of the pricing columns, type in a comma, and then
do the same thing for the other currency; the number produced is your
correlation. Although it is not necessary to update your numbers every day,
updating them once every couple of weeks or at the very least once a month
is generally a good idea.
SAMPLE CORRELATIONS RESULTS
Table 6.1 presents a sample of the output results.


--- PAGE 95 ---
TABLE 6.1
Correlation Table: Data for April 2008
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
1 Month
0.63
−0.70
0.36
0.47
−0.94
−0.15
3 Months
0.43
−0.61
0.46
0.31
−0.86
−0.20
6 Months
0.51
−0.36
0.55
0.50
−0.85
−0.33
1 Year
0.52
−0.26
0.60
0.47
−0.83
−0.38
AUD/USD
EUR/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
1 Month
0.63
−0.30
0.08
0.82
−0.46
−0.26
3 Months
0.43
0.13
0.24
0.85
−0.07
−0.52
6 Months
0.51
0.35
0.41
0.86
−0.15
−0.60
1 Year
0.52
0.41
0.45
0.86
−0.16
−0.60
USD/JPY
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
1 Month
−0.70
−0.30
−0.10
−0.02
0.83
−0.16
3 Months
−0.61
0.13
−0.07
0.22
0.86
−0.30
6 Months
−0.36
0.35
0.01
0.36
0.68
−0.39
1 Year
−0.26
0.41
0.04
0.44
0.61
−0.36
GBP/USD
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
1 Month
0.36
0.08
−0.10
0.20
−0.31
−0.24
3 Months
0.46
0.24
−0.07
0.25
−0.30
−0.36
6 Months
0.55
0.41
0.01
0.37
−0.34
−0.42
1 Year
0.60
0.45
0.04
0.41
−0.38
−0.44
NZD/USD
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
1 Month
0.47
0.82
−0.02
0.20
−0.29
−0.04
3 Months
0.31
0.85
0.22
0.25
0.04
−0.44
6 Months
0.50
0.86
0.36
0.37
−0.13
−0.52
1 Year
0.47
0.86
0.44
0.41
−0.10
−0.55
79


--- PAGE 96 ---
TABLE 6.1
Correlation Table: Data for April 2008 (Continued)
USD/CHF
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CAD
1 Month
−0.94
−0.46
0.83
−0.31
−0.29
0.02
3 Months
−0.86
−0.07
0.86
−0.30
0.04
−0.09
6 Months
−0.85
−0.15
0.68
−0.34
−0.13
0.04
1 Year
−0.83
−0.16
0.61
−0.38
−0.10
0.09
USD/CAD
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
1 Month
−0.15
−0.26
−0.16
−0.24
−0.04
0.02
3 Months
−0.20
−0.52
−0.30
−0.36
−0.44
−0.09
6 Months
−0.33
−0.60
−0.39
−0.42
−0.52
0.04
1 Year
−0.38
−0.60
−0.36
−0.44
−0.55
0.09
Date
EUR/USD
AUD/USD
USD/JPY
GBP/USD
NZD/USD
USD/CHF
USD/CAD
5/1/2007–10/31/2007
6-Month Trailing
0.54
−0.02
0.71
0.46
−0.80
−0.49
6/1/2007–11/30/2007
6-Month Trailing
0.54
0.03
0.72
0.48
−0.80
−0.51
7/2/2007–12/31/2007
6-Month Trailing
0.55
−0.03
0.74
0.52
−0.81
−0.47
8/1/2007–1/31/2008
6-Month Trailing
0.58
−0.01
0.67
0.60
−0.83
−0.50
9/3/2007–2/29/2008
6-Month Trailing
0.57
−0.20
0.66
0.54
−0.84
−0.46
10/1/2007–3/31/2008
6-Month Trailing
0.52
−0.30
0.60
0.49
−0.83
−0.39
11/1/2007– 4/30/2008
6-Month Trailing
0.51
−0.36
0.55
0.50
−0.85
−0.33
Average
0.55
−0.13
0.66
0.51
−0.82
−0.45
80


--- PAGE 97 ---
C H A P T E R 7
Seasonality—How
It Applies to
the FX Market
M
ost traders attempt to analyze the future direction of currencies
by using either fundamental or technical analysis—or if they’re
feeling particularly crafty, a combination of both. However, many
traders may not realize that the clearest way to analyze past price behavior
may be to look at the price activity itself, without the noise of the indica-
tors. One way to do this is through seasonality.
Stock traders may be very familiar with the concept of seasonality, be-
cause one of the most famous cases of seasonality is the January effect
in equities. First identiﬁed in 1942, it was publicized by Robert A. Haugen
and Josef Lakonishok in 1992 through their book The Incredible January
Effect: The Stock Market’s Unsolved Mystery (Irwin Professional Pub.,
1987). The theory behind the January effect is that stocks perform par-
ticularly well in the period between the last day of December and the ﬁfth
trading day of January. The reason for this historically spectacular perfor-
mance is the reversal of year-end ﬂows. When a ﬁscal year comes to a close,
many investors may cash in on their stocks to create tax losses and to rec-
ognize their capital gains, while some corporations may do similar things to
window-dress their balance sheets. The January effect is not the only case
of seasonality in stocks. Another pattern, known as the Mark Twain effect,
refers to stock returns being particularly weak in the month of October.
The name of the effect comes from a quote in Mark Twain’s Pudd’nhead
Wilson novel: “October. This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months
to speculate in stocks. The others are July, January, September, April,
November, May, March, June, December, August, and February.”
Seasonality, which is deﬁned as a pattern that occurs at given times
within a calendar year, is not unique to the equity market. Unsurprisingly,
81


--- PAGE 98 ---
82
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
it occurs in the currency market as well. As in stocks, the most obvious
case of seasonality is in the month of January. This makes sense because
when foreign investors reinitiate some of their equity market positions in
the month of January, they will usually need to convert their local curren-
cies into U.S. dollars. With that in mind, however, not all currency pairs are
created equal; therefore, the U.S. dollar may see a stronger case of season-
ality against some currencies than against others.
SEASONALITY IN JANUARY
At the end of 2007, I conducted a seasonality study for the month of
January. The study measures the change between the price of a currency
pair at the beginning of the month and at the end of the month for the past
11 years (1997 to 2007). According to the data, the strongest case of sea-
sonality was in the EUR/USD and USD/CHF.
As illustrated in Figure 7.1, the U.S. dollar rose against the euro nine
out of the past 11 years or 81.8 percent of the time between January 1
EUR/USD January Performance 1997–2007
4%
2%
0%
–2%
–4%
–6%
–8%
–10%
–3.2%
–7.8%
–3.6%
–3.4%
–3.7%
–1.3%
–1.0%
2.7%
2.5%
–0.5%
–1.7%
1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005     2006    2007
FIGURE 7.1
EUR/USD January Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 99 ---
Seasonality—How It Applies to the FX Market
83
and January 31 (synthetic euro prices were used prior to the euro’s launch
in January 1999). The biggest percentage loss was in 1997, when the
EUR/USD dropped 7.8 percent, while the average loss, including the two
up years in 2003 and 2006, was –1.9 percent. Looking a little further back,
the average loss between 1979 and 2007 was –1.2 percent. Beginning-of-the-
year positioning is the primary reason for this strong case of seasonality,
and even though it does not happen 100 percent of the time, the fact that
it has happened 81.8 percent of the time makes it statistically signiﬁcant.
Keeping on top of seasonality helps traders focus on strategies where prob-
abilities are in their favor.
We see a similar case of January seasonality in USD/CHF. In Figure 7.2,
the U.S. dollar also rose against the Swiss franc nine out of the past 11 years
or 81.8 percent of the time between January 1 and January 31. The cor-
relation between the EUR/USD and USD/CHF data is unsurprising given
that these two currency pairs typically move in opposite directions. The
biggest percentage gain in the dollar was also in 1997 when the currency
pair rallied 6.1 percent. The biggest percentage loss was in 2006 when the
USD/CHF January Performance 1997–2007
6.1%
1.1%
1.5%
3.5%
1.5%
4.2%
–1.3%
1997    1998    1999   2000     2001    2002    2003   2004    2005    2006    2007
–4%
–3%
–2%
–1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
–2.7%
2.1%
3.9%
3.2%
FIGURE 7.2
USD/CHF January Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 100 ---
84
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
currency pair dropped 2.7 percent. Including the two years when USD/CHF
declined, on average the currency pair rose 2.1 percent in the month of
January between 1997 and 2007. Looking a little further back, the average
gain between 1979 and 2007 was 2.0 percent.
The seasonality in USD/JPY for the month of January is slightly less
than the seasonality in the EUR/USD or USD/CHF. According to Figure 7.3,
the U.S. dollar rose against the Japanese yen eight out of the past 11 years
or 72.7 percent of the time between January 1 and January 31. The biggest
percentage gain was in 2000 when the currency pair rallied 4.9 percent.
The biggest percentage loss was in 1998 when the currency pair dropped
2.8 percent. Including the three years when USD/JPY dropped, on average
the currency pair rose 1.3 percent in the month of January between 1997
and 2007. Looking a little further back, the average gain between 1979 and
2007 was 1.04 percent. Part of the reason why the seasonality may not be
as strong in USD/JPY is because Japan has a different ﬁscal year-end than
the United States. Japan’s ﬁscal year-end is in March, which means there
may be less window dressing by Japanese corporations during the month
of January.
USD/JPY January Performance 1997–2007
4.6%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
–1%
–2%
–3%
–4%
1997    1998    1999   2000    2001    2002   2003    2004    2005    2006   2007
4.9%
2.2%
1.9%
2.5%
1.0%
0.9%
1.4%
–1.4%
–2.8%
–0.6%
FIGURE 7.3
USD/JPY January Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 101 ---
Seasonality—How It Applies to the FX Market
85
Aside from the EUR/USD, USD/CHF, and USD/JPY, there really is no
seasonality in the other major currency pairs. Over the past 11 years, for
example, the U.S. dollar climbed against the British pound, Australian dol-
lar, and Canadian dollar six times, which is 54 percent of the sample, while
it rose against the New Zealand dollar ﬁve times, which is 45 percent of the
sample. These numbers are not statistically signiﬁcant, which is why the
seasonality for those currencies is essentially nonexistent.
SUMMER SEASONALITY
July and August are the peak months of summer in the northern hemi-
sphere. For the currency markets, the summer usually brings less volatile
price action as many traders focus on enjoying their vacations. Interest-
ingly enough, these two months also have a unique case of seasonality for
USD/JPY and USD/CAD. In both currency pairs, the dollar tends to rise in
the month of July and give back its gains in the month of August.
This can be seen in Figure 7.4 for USD/JPY. Between 1997 and 2007,
USD/JPY rose in July in nine out of 11 years, with the biggest gain in 1998
USD/JPY July and August 1997–2007
4.1%
6%
4%
2%
0%
–2%
–4%
–6%
–8%
1.9%
3.3%
3.0%
2.2%
2.3%
1.4%
0.2%
–1.8%
–1.7%
–3.2%
–3.8%
–5.2%
–5.6%
–4.0%
–4.7%
–2.5%
–1.4%
0.2%
0.7%
0.1%
1997    1998   1999    2000   2001    2002    2003   2004    2005   2006    2007
July
August
–2.4%
FIGURE 7.4
USD/JPY July and August Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 102 ---
86
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
and the biggest loss in 1999. On average, over the past 11 years, USD/JPY
has increased 0.5 percent in the month of July. In August, however, we see
that the currency pair dropped nine out of 11 years, with the biggest loss
in 2001, when USD/JPY dropped 5.2 percent in one month. As indicated by
the chart, the move in August was typically larger than the move in July,
with the average loss being –2.1 percent during this period.
The seasonality is also very signiﬁcant in USD/CAD. As indicated in
Figure 7.5, between 1997 and 2007, USD/CAD rose in July in eight out
of 11 years, with the biggest increase in 2002. Including the three nega-
tive months, USD/CAD increased 1.5 percent during that period. What is
most interesting about the data is the fact that the decline in USD/CAD
in 1997, 2004, and 2005 was very small. Therefore, it may be a relatively
low-risk bet that USD/CAD will continue to appreciate in the years ahead
in the month of July. August, however, is slightly different. The U.S. dol-
lar dropped against the Canadian dollar eight out of the past 11 years,
but in the three years that the currency pair rallied, the moves were com-
paratively signiﬁcant. Nonetheless, the probability is still skewed toward
USD/CAD July and August 1997–2007
5%
4%
3.0%
3.5%
0.7%
2.9%
0.4%
1.3%1.1%
4.2%
4.1%
1.3%
0.1%
–1.0%
–0.1%
–0.2%
–1.2%
–1.4%
–1.0%
–0.9%
–1.6%
–2.5%
–2.9%
3%
2%
1%
0%
–1%
–0.2%
–2%
–3%
–4%
July
August
1997    1998    1999    2000     2001    2002    2003    2004     2005    2006    2007
FIGURE 7.5
USD/CAD July and August Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 103 ---
Seasonality—How It Applies to the FX Market
87
weakness for USD/CAD in the eighth month of the year, with the average
loss being –0.7 percent.
There are many reasons to explain this seasonality, and one of them
may be tourism. According to 2007 data from the Governmental Of-
ﬁce of Travel and Tourism Industries, Canada is the number-one tourist-
generating country for the United States, followed by Mexico, the United
Kingdom, and Japan. Given that summer is often the time of year that many
people choose to go on vacations, the performance of the U.S. dollar in
August may be reﬂection of travel trends.
OTHER CASES OF SEASONALITY
Here are some other noteworthy cases of seasonality.
May
As indicated by Figure 7.6 and Figure 7.7, the U.S. dollar also tends to
strengthen against the Australian and New Zealand dollars in the month
AUD/USD May Performance 1997–2007
6%
4%
2%
0%
–2%
–2.7%
–4.3%
–1.8% –2.2%
–1.2%
5.1%
4.1%
–1.0%
–3.3%
–0.3%
–0.9%
–4%
–6%
1997    1998     1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
FIGURE 7.6
AUD/USD May Performance 1997–2007


--- PAGE 104 ---
88
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
NZD/USD May Performance 1997–2007
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
–2%
–0.6%
–1.1%
–3.7%
–0.5%
1.0%
2.8%
6.6%
–0.5%
–3.7%
–4.6%
–6.1%
–4%
–6%
–8%
1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007     
FIGURE 7.7
NZD/USD May Performance 1997–2007
of May. For the AUD/USD, the currency pair managed to end the month of
May higher only two out of the past 11 years. The NZD/USD fared slightly
better, having managed to end in positive territory three out of the past
11 years.
September
A strong case of seasonality can also be seen in the USD/CHF and the
GBP/USD in the month of September. (See Figure 7.8.) The dominant trend
during that month is dollar weakness, and for both currency pairs, the dol-
lar weakened nine out of the past 11 years. It is also most likely not a coin-
cidence that the two years the dollar strengthened (2005 and 2006) are the
same for both currency pairs. There is some seasonality in the EUR/USD
as well, but it is not as signiﬁcant: In the month of September, the dollar
fell against the euro eight out of the past 11 years.


--- PAGE 105 ---
Seasonality—How It Applies to the FX Market
89
September Seasonality 1997–2007
6%
4%
2%
0.3%
1.0%
2.7%
2.0%
1.4%
1.4%
1.1%
5.2%
0.5%
3.2%
1.6%
0%
–4%
–2%
–3.2%
–3.9%
–1.2%
–0.9%
–2.8%
–1.4%
–1.6%
–2.3% –1.7%
–3.8%
–6.1%
–8%
USD/CHF
GBP/USD
1197    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
–6%
FIGURE 7.8
USD/CHF and GBP/USD September Performance 1997–2007
November
The ﬁnal case of strong seasonality can be found in the month of
November. Although not as statistically signiﬁcant as the seasonality in
the months of May and September, the New Zealand dollar has managed
to appreciate against the U.S. dollar eight out of the past 11 years. On av-
erage, the appreciation was 1.9 percent, which for the most part is fairly
signiﬁcant. (See Figure 7.9.)
INCORPORATING SEASONALITY INTO
YOUR TRADING
The best way to incorporate seasonality into your FX trading is to be simply
mindful of it. For example, it may be better to look for opportunities to buy


--- PAGE 106 ---
90
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
NZD/USD November Performance 1997–2007
5%
4%
4.3%
2.5%
1.4%
0.2%
–0.5%
–1.4%
–0.7%
3.9%
4.1%
0.4%
2.0%
3%
1%
2%
0%
–1%
–2%
1997    1998    1999     2000     2001    2002     2003     2004     2005    2006    2007
FIGURE 7.9
NZD/USD November Performance 1997–2007
the NZD/USD in the month of November than to sell it. Seasonal trades do
not always duplicate themselves, which is why trading seasonality blindly
by buying at the beginning of the month and selling it at the end of the
month may not be the best thing to do, but what seasonality does teach us
is where the probabilities are skewed.


--- PAGE 107 ---
C H A P T E R 8
Trade
Parameters for
Different Market
Conditions
A
fter having gone through the emergence of the foreign exchange mar-
ket, who the major players are, signiﬁcant historical milestones, and
what moves the markets, it is time to cover some of my favorite
strategies for trading currencies. However, before I even begin going over
these strategies, the most important ﬁrst step for any trader, regardless of
the market that you are trading in, is to create a trading journal.
KEEPING A TRADING JOURNAL
Through my experience, I have learned that being a successful trader is
not about ﬁnding the holy grail of indicators that can perfectly forecast
movements 100 percent of the time, but instead to develop discipline. I
cannot overemphasize the importance of keeping a trading journal as the
primary ﬁrst step to becoming a successful and professional trader. While
working on the interbank FX trading desk at J. P. Morgan and then on the
cross-markets trading desk after the merger with Chase, the trading jour-
nal mentality was ingrained into the minds of every dealer and proprietary
trader on the trading ﬂoors, regardless of rank. The reason was simple: the
bank was providing the capital for trading and we needed to be held ac-
countable, especially since each transaction involved millions of dollars.
For every trade that was executed, we needed to have a solid rationale as
well as justiﬁcation for the choice of entry and exit levels. More speciﬁ-
cally, you had to know where to place your exit points before you placed
the trade to approximate worst-case losses and to manage risk.
91


--- PAGE 108 ---
92
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
With this sort of accountability, the leading banks of the world are
able to breed successful and professional traders. For individual traders,
this practice is even more important because you are trading with your
own money and not someone else’s. For interbank traders, when it comes
down to the bottom line, it is someone else’s money that they are trad-
ing with and regardless of how poorly they might have performed over the
prior two weeks, they will still be receiving a paycheck twice a month. At
a bank, traders have plenty of time to make the money back without any
disruptions to their daily way of life—unless of course they lose $1 mil-
lion in one day. As an individual trader you do not have this luxury. When
you are trading with your own money, each dollar earned or lost is your
money. Therefore, even though you should be trading only with risk capi-
tal, or money that would not otherwise be used for rent or groceries, one
way or the other, the pain is felt. To avoid repeating the same mistakes
and taking large losses, I cannot stress enough the importance of keeping a
trading journal. The journal is designed to ensure that as a trader you take
only calculated losses and you learn from each one of your mistakes. The
trading journal setup that I recommend is broken up into three parts:
1. Currency Pair Checklist.
2. Trades That I Am Waiting For.
3. Existing or Completed Trades.
Currency Pair Checklist
The ﬁrst section of your trading journal should consist of a spreadsheet that
can be printed out and completed every day. This purpose of this checklist
is to get a feel for the market and to identify trades. It should list all of the
currency pairs that are offered for trading in the left column, followed by
three columns for the current, high, and low prices and then a series of
triggers laid out as a row on the right-hand side. Newer traders probably
want to start off with following only the four major currency pairs, which
are the EUR/USD, USD/JPY, USD/CHF, and GBP/USD, and then gradually
add in the crosses. Although the checklist that I have created is fairly de-
tailed, I ﬁnd that it is a very useful daily exercise and should take no more
than 20 minutes to complete once the appropriate indicators are saved on
the charts. The purpose of this checklist is to get a clear visual of which
currencies are trending and which are range trading. Comprehending the
big picture is the ﬁrst step to trading successfully. Too often I have seen
traders fail because they lose sight of the overall environment that they
are trading in. The worst thing to do is to trade blindly. Trying to pick
tops or bottoms in a strong trend or buying breakouts in a range-bound


--- PAGE 109 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
93
environment can lead to signiﬁcant losses. You can see in Figure 8.1 of the
EUR/USD that trying to pick tops in this pair would have led to more than
three years of frustrating and unsuccessful trading. For trending environ-
ments, traders will ﬁnd a higher success rate by buying on retracements in
an uptrend or selling on rallies in a downtrend. Picking tops and bottoms
should be a strategy that is used only in clear range-trading environments,
and even then traders need to be careful of contracting ranges leading to
breakout scenarios.
A simpliﬁed version of the daily market overview sheet that I use is
shown in Table 8.1. As you can see in the table, the ﬁrst two columns after
the daily high and low prices are the levels of the 10-day high and low. List-
ing these prices helps to identify where current prices are within previous
price action. This helps traders gauge whether we are pressing toward a
10-day high or low or if we are simply trapped in the middle of the range.
Yet just the prices alone do not provide enough information to determine
if we are in a trending or a range-bound environment. The next ﬁve indica-
tors provide a checklist for determining a trending environment. The more
X marks in this section, the stronger the trend.
FIGURE 8.1
EUR/USD Three-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 110 ---
TABLE 8.1
Currency Checklist
March 30, 2005–7:30 AM EST
e
g
n
a
R
g
n
i
d
n
e
r
T
Currency
Current
Daily
Daily
10-day 10-day ADX (14)
Crosses
Crosses Crosses Crosses ADX (14) RSI (14)
RSI (14)
Stochastics Stochastics
Pair
Price
High
Low
High
Low
above 25 Bollinger 50-day
100-day 200-day below 25 Greater
Less than > 70
< 30
X
6
7
8
2
.
1
0
5
2
3
.
1
8
9
9
2
.
1
5
7
2
3
.
1
0
5
0
3
.
1
D
S
U
/
R
U
E
X
X
X
X
5
3
9
8
.
1
0
6
1
9
.
1
0
0
1
9
.
1
0
6
1
9
.
1
0
5
1
9
.
1
D
S
U
/
P
B
G
X
5
4
.
6
0
1
Y
P
J
/
D
S
U
USD/CHF
1.1855
AUD/USD
0.7126
NZD/USD
0.7150
USD/CAD
1.1975
EUR/JPY
EUR/GBP
EUR/CHF
AUD/JPY
CHF/JPY
GBP/JPY
GBP/CHF
AUD/CAD
EUR/CAD
AUD/NZD
94


--- PAGE 111 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
95
The ﬁrst column in the trending indicator group is the “ADX (14) above
25.” ADX is the Average Directional Index, which is the most popularly
used indicator for determining the strength of a trend. If the index is
above 25, this indicates that a trend has developed. Generally speaking, the
greater the number, the stronger the trend. The next column uses Bollinger
bands. When strong trends develop, the pair will frequently tag and cross ei-
ther the upper or lower Bollinger band. The next three trend indicators are
the longer-term simple moving averages (SMAs). A break above or below
these moving averages may also be indicative of a trending environment.
With moving averages, crossovers in the direction of the trend can be used
as a further conﬁrmation. If there are two or more Xs in this section, traders
should be looking for opportunities to buy on dips in an uptrend or sell on
rallies in a downtrend rather than selling at the top and buying back at the
bottom of the range.
The last section of the trading journal is the range group. The ﬁrst in-
dicator is once again ADX, but this time, we are looking for ADX below
25, which would suggest that the currency pair’s trend is weak. Next, we
look at the traditional oscillators, the Relative Strength Index (RSI), and
stochastics. If the ADX is weak and there is signiﬁcant technical resistance
above, provided by indicators such as moving averages or Fibonacci re-
tracement levels, and RSI and/or stochastics are at overbought or oversold
levels, we identify an environment that is highly conducive to range trading.
Of course, the market overview sheet is not foolproof, and just be-
cause you have numerous X marks in either the trend group or the range
group doesn’t mean that a trend will not fade or a breakout will not occur.
Yet what this spreadsheet will do is certainly prevent traders from trading
blindly and ignoring the broader market conditions. It will provide traders
with a launching pad from which to identify the day’s trading opportunities.
Trades That I Am Waiting For
The next section in the trading journal lists the possible trades for the day.
Based on an initial overview of the charts, this section is where you should
list the trades that you are waiting to make. A sample entry would be:
April 5, 2005
Buy AUD/USD on a break of 0.7850 (previous day high).
Stop at 0.7800 (50-day SMA).
Target 1—0.7925 (38.2% Fibonacci retracement of Nov.–Mar. bull
wave).
Target 2—0.8075 (upper Bollinger).
Target 3—10-day trailing low.


--- PAGE 112 ---
96
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Therefore, as soon as your entry level is reached, you know exactly
how you want to take action and where to place your stops and limits. Of
course, it is also important to take a quick glance at the market to make
sure that the trading conditions that you were looking for are still intact.
For example, if you were looking for a strong breakout with no retracement
to occur at the entry level, when it does break, you want to make sure that
the scenario that you were looking for plays out. This exercise is used to
help you develop a plan of action to tackle your trading day. Before every
battle, warriors regroup to go over the plan of attack; in trading you want
to have the same mentality. Plan and prepare for the worst-case scenario
and know your plan of attack for the day!
Existing or Completed Trades
This section is developed and used to enforce discipline and to learn from
your mistakes. At the end of each trading day, it is important to review
this section to understand why certain trades resulted in losses and others
resulted in proﬁts. The purpose of this section is to identify trends. I will
use a completely unrelated example to explain why this is important. On a
normal day, most people will subconsciously inject a lot of “ums” or “uhs”
into their daily conversation. However, I bet most of these people do not
even realize that they are even doing it until someone records one of their
conversations and plays it back to them. This is one of the ways that pro-
fessional presenters and newscasters train to kick the habit of using place-
holder words. Having worked with more than 65,000 traders, too often have
I seen these traders repeatedly make the same mistakes. This could be tak-
ing proﬁts too early, letting losses run, getting emotional about trading,
ignoring economic releases, or getting into a trade prematurely. Having a
record of previous trades is like keeping a recording of your conversations.
When you ﬂip back to the trades that you have completed, you have a per-
fect map of what strategies have or have not been proﬁtable for you. The
reason why a journal is so important is because it minimizes the emotional
component of trades. I frequently see novice traders take proﬁts early but
let losses run. The following are two samples of trade journal entries that
could provide learning opportunities:
February 12, 2005
Trade: Short 3 lots of EUR/USD @ 1.3045.
Stop: 1.3095 (former all-time high).
Target: 1.2900.


--- PAGE 113 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
97
Result: Trade closed on Feb. 13, 2005—stopped out of the 3 lots @
1.3150 (–105 pips).
Comments: Got margin call! EUR/USD broke the all-time high, but I
thought it was going to reverse, and did not stick to stop—kept letting
losses run, until eventually margin call closed out all positions. Note to
self: Make sure stick to stops!
April 3, 2005
Trade: Long 2 lots of USD/CAD @ 1.1945.
Stop: 1.1860 (strong technical support—conﬂuence of 50-day moving
average and 68% Fibonacci retracement of Feb.-Mar. rally).
Target: First lot @ 1.2095 (upper Bollinger and 5 pips shy of 1.2100
psychological resistance).
Second lot @ 1.2250 (former head and shoulders support turned resis-
tance, 100-day SMA).
Result: Trade closed on Apr. 5, 2005—stopped out of the 2 lots at
1.1860 (–85 pips).
Comments: USD/CAD did not continue uptrend and was becoming
overbought; I didn’t see that ADX was weakening and falling from
higher levels and that there was also a divergence in stochastics. Note
to self: Make sure to look for divergences next time!
Unlike many traders, I believe the best trades are where both the tech-
nical and fundamental pictures are telling the same story. In line with this
premise, I prefer to stay out of trades that contradict my fundamental out-
look. For example, if there is a bullish formation in both the GBP/USD
and the AUD/USD due to U.S. dollar weakness, but the Bank of England
has ﬁnished raising interest rates, while the Reserve Bank of Australia has
full intentions of raising rates to tame the strength of the Australian econ-
omy, I would most likely choose to express my bearish dollar view in the
AUD/USD rather than the GBP/USD. My bias for choosing the AUD/USD
over the GBP/USD would be even stronger if the AUD/USD already offered
a higher interest rate differential than the GBP/USD. Too often have I seen
technicals thwarted by fundamentals, so now I always incorporate both
into my trading strategy. I use a combination of technical, fundamental,
and positioning and am generally also a trend follower. I also typically use
a top-down approach that involves the following:
1. First I will take an overall technical survey of the market and pick the
currency pairs that have retraced to attractive levels for entry in order
to participate in a medium-term trend.


--- PAGE 114 ---
98
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
2. For currencies with a dollar component (i.e., not the crosses), I deter-
mine if my initial technical view for that pair coincides with my fun-
damental view on the dollar as well as my view on how upcoming
U.S. releases may impact trading for the day. The reason why I look
at the dollar speciﬁcally is because 90 percent of all currency trades
involve the dollar, which makes U.S. fundamentals particularly impor-
tant.
3. If it is a cross-currency pair such as GBP/JPY, I will proceed by deter-
mining if the technical view coincides with the fundamental outlook
using Fibonacci retracements, ADX, moving averages, oscillators, and
other technical tools.
4. Then I like to look at positioning using the FXCM Speculative Senti-
ment index to see if it supports the trade.
5. If I am left with two equally compelling trade ideas, I will choose the
one with a positive interest rate differential.
HAVE A TOOLBOX—USE WHAT
WORKS FOR THE CURRENT
MARKET ENVIRONMENT
Once you have created a trading journal, it is time to ﬁgure out which indi-
cators to use on your charts. The reason why a lot of traders fail is because
they neglect to realize that their favorite indicators are not foolproof. Buy-
ing when stochastics are in oversold territory and selling when they are in
overbought territory is a strategy that is used quite often by range traders
with a great deal of success, but once the market stops range trading and
begins trending, then relying on stochastics could lead to a tremendous
amount of losses. In order to become consistently proﬁtable, successful
traders need to learn how to be adaptable.
One of the most important practices that every trader must under-
stand is to be conscious of the environment that they are trading in. Ev-
ery trader needs to have some sort of checklist that will help them to
classify their trading environment so that they can determine whether the
market is trending or range-bound. Deﬁning trade parameters is one of
the most important disciplines of trading. Too many traders have tried to
pick the top within a trend, only to wind up with consistently unproﬁtable
trades.
Although deﬁning trade parameters is important to traders in any mar-
ket (currencies, futures, equities), it is particularly important in the cur-
rency market since over 80 percent of the volume is speculative in nature.


--- PAGE 115 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
99
This means that currencies can spend a very long time in a certain trading
environment. Also, the currency market obeys technical analysis particu-
larly well given its large scale and number of participants.
There are basically two types of trading environments, which means
that at any point in time an instrument is either range trading or trending.
The ﬁrst step every trader needs to take is to deﬁne the current trading
environment. The shortest time frame that traders should use in step one
is daily charts, even if you are trading on a ﬁve-minute time frame.
STEP ONE—PROFILE
TRADING ENVIRONMENT
There are many different ways that traders can determine whether a cur-
rency pair is range trading or trending. Of course, many people do it visu-
ally, but having set rules will help to keep traders out of trends that may be
fading or to prevent traders from getting into a range trade in the midst of a
possible breakout. Table 8.2 outlines some of rules that I look for in order
to classify a currency pair’s trading environment.
Range
Look for:
ADX (Average Directional Index) Less Than 20
The average direc-
tional index is one of the primary technical indicators used to determine
the strength of a trend. When ADX is less than 20, this suggests that the
trend is weak, which is generally characteristic of a range-bound market.
TABLE 8.2
Trend/Range Trading Rules
Trade
Rules
Indicators
Range
• ADX < 20
Bollinger bands, ADX, options
• Decreasing implied volatility
• Risk reversals near choice or ﬂipping
between favoring calls and puts
Trend
• ADX > 25
Moving averages, ADX,
options, momentum
• Momentum consistent with
trend direction
• Risk reversals strongly bid for
put or call


--- PAGE 116 ---
100
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
An ADX less than 20 and trending downward provides a further conﬁrma-
tion that the trend not only is weak, but will probably stay in a range trading
environment for a while longer.
Decreasing Implied Volatility
There are many ways to analyze
volatility. What I like to do is actually track short-term versus long-term
volatility. When short-term volatility is falling, especially after a burst
above long-term volatility, it is usually indicative of a reversion to range
trading scenarios. Volatility usually blows out when a currency pair expe-
riences sharp, quick moves. It contracts when ranges are narrow and the
trading is very quiet in the markets. The lazy man’s version of the way I
track volatility is Bollinger bands, which provide a fairly decent measure
for determining volatility conditions. A narrow Bollinger band suggests
that ranges are small and there is low volatility in the markets, while wide
Bollinger bands are reﬂective of large ranges and a highly volatile envi-
ronment. In a range trading environment, we are looking for fairly narrow
Bollinger bands ideally in a horizontal formation similar to the USD/JPY
chart in Figure 8.2.
Risk Reversals Flipping between Calls and Puts
A risk reversal
consists of a pair of options, a call and a put, on the same currency. Risk re-
versals have both the same expiration (one month) and the same sensitivity
FIGURE 8.2
USD/JPY Bollinger Band Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 117 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
101
TABLE 8.3
Risk Reversals
14:40 GMT April 19th
1 Month to 1 Year Risk Reversal
Currency
1M R/R
3M R/R
6M R/R
1 YR R/R
USD/JPY
0.3/0.6 JC
0.7/1.0 JC
1.1/1/3 JC
1.3/1.6 JC
EUR/USD
0.1/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 EC
0.0/0.3 EC
0.1/0.4 EC
GBP/USD
0.0/0.3 SP
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.3 SC
0.0/0.3 SC
USD/CHF
0.2/0.2 CC
0.0/0.3 CC
0.0/0.4 CC
0.1/0.5 CC
JC = Japanese Yen Call
EC = Euro Call
SP = Sterling Put
SC = Sterling Call
CC = Swiss Call
to the underlying spot rate. They are quoted in terms of the difference in
volatility between the two options. While in theory these options should
have the same implied volatility, in practice these volatilities often differ
in the market. Risk reversals can be seen as having a market polling func-
tion. A number strongly in favor of calls or puts indicates that the market
prefers calls over puts. The reverse is true if the number is strongly in fa-
vor of puts versus calls. Thus, risk reversals can be used as a substitute
for gauging positions in the FX market. In an ideal environment, far out-of-
the-money calls and puts should have the same volatility. However, this is
rarely the case since there is generally a sentiment bias in the markets that
is reﬂected in risk reversals. In range-bound environments, risk reversals
tend to ﬂip between favoring calls and puts at nearly zero (or equal), indi-
cating that there is indecision among bulls and bears and there is no strong
bias in the markets.
What Does a Risk Reversal Table Look Like?
According to the
risk reversals shown in Table 8.3, we can see that the market is strongly
favoring yen calls (JC) and dollar puts over the long term. EUR/USD short-
term risk reversals are near zero, which is what you are looking for when
proﬁling a range-bound environment. The most readily available free re-
source that I know of for up-to-date risk reversals is the IFR news plug-in
which can be found on the FX Trading Station at www.fxcm.com.
Trend
Look for:


--- PAGE 118 ---
102
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
ADX (Average Directional Index) Greater Than 20
As mentioned
earlier when we talked about range trading conditions, the Average Direc-
tional Index is one of the primary technical indicators used to determine
the strength of a trend. In a trending environment, we look for ADX to be
greater than 25 and rising. However, if ADX is greater than 25 but sloping
downward, especially off of the extreme 40 level, you have to be careful of
aggressive trend positioning since the downward slope may indicate that
the trend is waning.
Momentum Consistent with Trend Direction
In addition to using
ADX, I also recommend looking for a conﬁrmation of a trending environ-
ment through momentum indicators. Traders should look for momentum
to be consistent with the direction of the trend. Most currency traders will
look for oscillators to point strongly in the direction of the trend. For ex-
ample, in an uptrend, trend traders will look for the moving averages, RSI,
stochastics, and moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) to all
point strongly upward. In a downtrend, they will look for these same in-
dicators to point downward. Some currency traders use the momentum
index, but only to a lesser extent. One of the strongest momentum indi-
cators is a perfect order in moving averages. A perfect order is when the
moving averages line up perfectly; that is, for an uptrend, the 10-day SMA
is greater than the 20-day SMA, which is greater than the 50-day SMA. The
100-day SMA and the 200-day SMA are below the shorter-term moving av-
erages. In a downtrend, a perfect order would be when the shorter-term
moving averages stack up below the longer-term moving averages.
Options (Risk Reversals)
With a trending environment, we are look-
ing for risk reversals to strongly favor calls or puts. When one side of the
market is laden with interest, it is usually indicative of a strongly trending
environment or that a contra-trend move may be brewing if risk reversals
are at extreme levels.
STEP TWO—DETERMINE TRADING
TIME HORIZON
Once you have determined that a currency pair is either range-bound or
trending, it is time to determine how long you plan on holding the trade.
The following is a set of guidelines and indicators that I use for trading
different time frames. Not all of the guidelines need to be met, but the more
guidelines that are met, the more solid the trading opportunity.


--- PAGE 119 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
103
Intraday Range Trade
Rules
1. Use hourly charts to determine entry points and daily charts to conﬁrm
that a range trade exists on a longer time frame.
2. Use oscillators to determine entry point within range.
3. Look for short-dated risk reversals to be near choice.
4. Look for reversal in oscillators (RSI or stochastics at extreme point).
5. It is a stronger trade when prices fail at key resistance or hold key sup-
port levels (use Fibonacci retracement points and moving averages).
Indicators
Stochastics, MACD, RSI, Bollinger bands, options, Fi-
bonacci retracement levels.
Medium-Term Range Trade
Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. There are two ways to range trade in the medium term: position for up-
coming range trading opportunities or get involved in existing ranges:
Upcoming range opportunities: Look for high-volatility environments,
where short-term implied volatilities are signiﬁcantly higher than
longer-term volatilities; seek reversion back to the mean environments.
Existing ranges: Use Bollinger bands to identify existing ranges.
3. Look for reversals in oscillators such as RSI and stochastics.
4. Make sure ADX is below 25 and ideally falling.
5. Look for medium-term risk reversals near choice.
6. Conﬁrm with price action—failure at key range resistances and
bounces on key range supports (using traditional technical indicators).
Indicators
Options, Bollinger bands, stochastics, MACD, RSI, Fi-
bonacci retracement levels.
Medium-Term Trend Trade
Rules
1. Look for developing trend on daily charts and use weekly charts for
conﬁrmation.


--- PAGE 120 ---
104
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
2. Refer back to the characteristics of a trending environment—look for
those parameters to be met.
3. Buy breakout/retracement scenarios on key Fibonacci levels or mov-
ing averages.
4. Look for no major resistance levels in front of trade.
5. Look for candlestick pattern conﬁrmation.
6. Look for moving average conﬂuence to be on same side of trade.
7. Enter on a break of signiﬁcant high or low.
8. The ideal is to wait for volatilities to contract before getting in.
9. Look for fundamentals to also be supportive of trade—growth and in-
terest rates. You want to see a string of economic surprises or disap-
pointments, depending on directional bias.
Indicators
ADX, parabolic stop and reversal (SAR), RSI, Ichimoku
clouds (a Japanese formation), Elliott waves, Fibonacci.
Medium-Term Breakout Trade
Rules
1. Use daily charts.
2. Look for contraction in short-term volatility to a point where it is
sharply below long-term volatility.
3. Use pivot points to determine whether a break is a true break or a false
break.
4. Look for moving average conﬂuences to be supportive of trade.
Indicators
Bollinger bands, moving averages, Fibonacci.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Although risk management is one of the simpler topics to grasp, it seems to
be the hardest to follow for most traders. Too often we have seen traders
turn winning positions into losing positions and solid strategies result in
losses instead of proﬁts. Regardless of how intelligent and knowledgeable
traders may be about the markets, their own psychology will cause them
to lose money. What could be the cause of this? Are the markets really so
enigmatic that few can proﬁt? Or is there simply a common mistake that
many traders are prone to make? The answer is the latter. And the good


--- PAGE 121 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
105
news is that the problem, while it can be an emotionally and psychologi-
cally challenging one, is ultimately fairly easy to grasp and solve.
Most traders lose money simply because they have no understanding
of or place no importance on risk management. Risk management involves
essentially knowing how much you are willing to risk and how much you
are looking to gain. Without a sense of risk management, most traders sim-
ply hold on to losing positions for an extremely long amount of time, but
take proﬁts on winning positions far too prematurely. The result is a seem-
ingly paradoxical scenario that in reality is all too common: the trader ends
up having more winning positions than losing ones, but ends up with a neg-
ative proﬁt/loss (P/L). So, what can traders do to ensure they have solid
risk management habits? There are a few key guidelines that all traders,
regardless of their strategy or what they are trading, should keep in mind.
Risk-Reward Ratio
Traders should look to establish a risk-reward ratio for every trade they
place. In other words, they should have an idea of how much they are will-
ing to lose, and how much they are looking to gain. Generally, the risk-
reward ratio should be at least 1:2, if not more. Having a solid risk-reward
ratio can prevent traders from entering positions that ultimately are not
worth the risk.
Stop-Loss Orders
Traders should also employ stop-loss orders as a way of specifying the
maximum loss they are willing to accept. By using stop-loss orders, traders
can avoid the common predicament of being in a scenario where they have
many winning trades but a single loss large enough to eliminate any trace of
proﬁtability in the account. Trailing stops to lock in proﬁts are particularly
useful. A good habit of more successful traders is to employ the rule of
moving your stop to break even as soon as your position has proﬁted by the
same amount that you initially risked through the stop order. At the same
time, some traders may also choose to close a portion of their position.
For those looking to add to a winning position or go with a trend, the
best strategy is to treat the new transaction as if it were a new trade of
its own, independent of the winning position. If you are going to add to a
winning position, perform the same analysis of the chart that you would
if you had no position at all. If a trade continues to go in your favor, you
can also close out part of the position while trailing your stop higher on
the remaining lots that you are holding. Try thinking about your risk and
reward on each separate lot that you have bought if they are at different
entry points as well. If you buy a second lot 50 pips above your ﬁrst entry


--- PAGE 122 ---
106
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
point, don’t use the same stop price on both, but manage the risk on the
second lot independently from the ﬁrst.
Using Stop-Loss Orders to Manage Risk
Given the importance of
money management to successful trading, using the stop-loss order is im-
perative for any trader looking to succeed in the currency market. The stop-
loss order allows traders to specify the maximum loss they are willing to
accept on any given trade. If the market reaches the rate the trader spec-
iﬁes in his/her stop-loss order, then the trade will be closed immediately.
As a result, using stop-loss orders allows you to know how much you are
risking at the time you enter the trade.
There are two parts to successfully using a stop-loss order: (1) initially
placing the stop at a reasonable level and (2) trailing the stop—meaning
moving it forward toward proﬁtability—as the trade progresses in
your favor.
Placing the Stop-Loss
There are two recommended ways of placing
a stop-loss order.
Two-Day Low Method
These volatility-based stops involve placing
your stop-loss order approximately 10 pips below the two-day low of the
pair. For example, if the low on the EUR/USD’s most recent candle was
1.1200 and the previous candle’s low was 1.1100, then the stop should be
placed around 1.1090—10 pips below the two-day low—if a trader is look-
ing to get long.
Parabolic Stop and Reversal (SAR)
Another form of volatility-based
stop is the parabolic SAR, an indicator that is found on many currency
trading charting applications. The FX Power Charts, for instance, offer
this indicator, freely available to all course subscribers (www.fxcm.com).
Parabolic SAR is a volatility-based indicator that graphically displays a
small dot at the point on the chart where the stop should be placed.
Figure 8.3 is an example of a chart with parabolic SAR placed on it.
There is no magic formula that works best in every situation, but the
following is an example of how these stops could be used. Upon entering
a long position, determine where support is and place a stop 20 pips below
support. For example, let’s say this is 60 pips below the entry point.
If the trade earns a proﬁt of 60 pips, close half of the position in a
market order, then move the stop up to the entry point. At this time, trail the
stop 60 pips behind the moving market price. If the parabolic SAR moves up
so that it is above the entry point, you could switch to using the parabolic
SAR as the stop level. Of course, during the day, there can be other signals
that could prompt you to move your stop. If the price breaks through a
new resistance level, that resistance then becomes support. You can place


--- PAGE 123 ---
Trade Parameters for Diﬀerent Market Conditions
107
a stop 20 pips below that support level, even if it is only 30 to 40 pips away
from the current price. The underlying principle you have to use is to ﬁnd a
point to place your stop where you would no longer want to be in the trade
once the price reaches that level. Usually the stop falls at a point where the
price goes below support.
PSYCHOLOGICAL OUTLOOK
Aside from employing proper risk management strategies, one of the other
most crucial yet overlooked elements of successful trading is maintaining
a healthy psychological outlook. At the end of the day, traders who are
unable to cope with the stress of market ﬂuctuations will not stand the test
of time—no matter how skilled they may be at the more scientiﬁc elements
of trading.
Emotional Detachment
Traders must make trading decisions based on strategies independent of
fear and greed. One of the premier attributes good traders have is that
of emotional detachment: while they are dedicated and fully involved in
their trades, they are not emotionally married to them; they accept losing,
and make their investment decisions on an intellectual level. Traders who
are emotionally involved in trading often make substantial errors, as they
FIGURE 8.3
Parabolic SAR
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 124 ---
108
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
tend to whimsically change their strategy after a few losing trades, or
become overly carefree after a few winning trades. A good trader must be
emotionally balanced, and must base all trading decisions on strategy—not
fear or greed.
Know When to Take a Break
In the midst of a losing streak, consider taking a break from trading before
fear and greed dominate your strategy.
Not every trade can be a winning one. As a result, traders must be psy-
chologically capable of coping with losses. Most traders, even successful
ones, go through stretches of losing trades. The key to being a successful
trader, though, is being able to come through a losing stretch unfazed and
undeterred. If you are going through a bad stretch, it may be time to take a
break from trading. Often, taking a few days off from watching the market
to clear your mind can be the best remedy for a losing streak. Continuing to
trade relentlessly during a tough market condition can breed greater losses
as well as ruin your psychological trading condition. Ultimately, it’s always
better to acknowledge your losses rather than continue to ﬁght through
them and pretend that they don’t exist. Make no mistake about it: regard-
less of how much you study, practice, or trade, there will be losing trades
throughout your entire career. The key is to make them small enough that
you can live to trade another day, while allowing your winning trades to
stay open. You can overcome a lot of bad luck with proper money manage-
ment techniques. This is why we stress a 2:1 reward-to-risk ratio, as well
as why I recommend not risking more than 2 percent of your equity on any
single trade.
Whether you are trading forex, equities, or futures, there are 10 trading
rules that successful traders should live by:
1. Limit your losses.
2. Let your proﬁts run.
3. Keep position sizes within reason.
4. Know your risk-reward ratio.
5. Be adequately capitalized.
6. Don’t ﬁght the trend.
7. Never add to losing positions.
8. Know market expectations.
9. Learn from your mistakes—keep a trading journal.
10. Have a maximum loss or retracement in proﬁts.


--- PAGE 125 ---
C H A P T E R 9
Technical
Trading
Strategies
MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS
In order to trade successfully on an intraday basis, it is important to be
selective. Trend trading is one of the most popular strategies employed
by global macro hedge funds. Although there are many traders who pre-
fer to range trade, the big proﬁt potentials tend to lie in trades that cap-
ture and participate in big market movements. It was once said by Mark
Boucher, a hedge fund manager of Midas Trust Fund and a former num-
ber one money manager as ranked by Nelson MarketPlace’s World’s Best
Money Managers, that 70 percent of a market’s moves occurs 20 percent
of the time. This makes multiple time frame analysis particularly important
because no trader wants to lose sight of the overall big picture. A great
comparison is taking a road trip from Chicago to Florida. There are cer-
tainly going to be a lot of left and right turns during the road trip, but the
driver needs to be aware throughout the whole trip that he or she is headed
south. In trading, looking for opportunities to buy in an uptrend or sell in a
downtrend tends to be much more proﬁtable than trying to pick tops and
bottoms.
The most common form of multiple time frame analysis is to use daily
charts to identify the overall trend and then to use the hourly charts to
determine speciﬁc entry levels.
The AUD/USD chart in Figure 9.1 is a daily chart of the Australian dol-
lar against the U.S. dollar. As you can see, the Australian dollar has been
trending higher since January 2002. Range or contrarian traders who con-
tinually looked to pick tops would have been faced with at least three years
109


--- PAGE 126 ---
110
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.1
AUD/USD Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
of unproﬁtable and difﬁcult trading, particularly when the currency pair
was hitting record highs in late 2003 into early 2004. This area would have
certainly attracted many traders looking to pick a top or to fade the trend.
Despite a dip in late 2004, the AUD/USD has remained strong going into
2005, which would have made it very difﬁcult for medium-term range play-
ers to trade.
Instead, the more effective trading strategy is to actually take a posi-
tion in the direction of the trend. In the AUD/USD example, this would have
involved looking for opportunities to buy on dips. Figure 9.2 is an hourly
chart with Fibonacci retracements drawn from the February 2004 all-time
high and the low of June 17, 2004. Rather than looking for opportunities
to sell, we use the 76 percent Fibonacci retracement level as key support
zones to go long the Australian dollar. The horizontal line in Figure 9.2 rep-
resents the Fibonacci retracement level. What we did therefore was use
the daily charts to get a gauge of the overall trend and then used the hourly
charts to pinpoint entry levels.
Let’s take a look at another example, this one of the British pound. Fig-
ure 9.3 is the daily chart of the GBP/USD for January 2002 to May 2005. Like
traders of the Australian dollar, traders trying to pick tops in the GBP/USD
would have also faced at least three years of difﬁcult trading, particularly
when the GBP/USD was making 10-year highs in January 2004. This level


--- PAGE 127 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
111
FIGURE 9.2
AUD/USD Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 9.3
GBP/USD Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 128 ---
112
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
would have certainly attracted many skeptics looking to pick tops. To the
frustration of those who did, the GBP/USD rallied up to 10 percent beyond
its 10-year highs post January, which means that those top pickers would
have incurred signiﬁcant losses.
Taking a look at the hourly chart for the GBP/USD, we want to look for
opportunities to buy on dips rather than sell on rallies. Figure 9.4 shows
two Fibonacci retracement levels drawn from the September 2004 and De-
cember 2004 bull wave. Those levels held pretty well on retracements be-
tween four-tenths and four-fourteenths while the 23.6 percent Fibonacci
level offered an opportunity for breakout trading rather than a signiﬁcant
resistance level. In that particular scenario, keeping in mind the bigger pic-
ture would have shielded traders from trying to engage in reversal plays at
those levels.
Multiple time frame analysis can also be employed on a shorter-term
basis. Let us take a look at an example using CHF/JPY. First we start
with our hourly chart of CHF/JPY, which is shown in Figure 9.5. Using Fi-
bonacci retracements, we see on our hourly charts that prices have failed
at the 38.2 percent retracement of the December 30, 2004, to February 9,
2005, bear wave numerous times. This indicates that the pair is contained
within a weeklong downtrend below those levels. Therefore, we want to
use our 15-minute charts to look for entry levels to participate in the overall
FIGURE 9.4
GBP/USD Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 129 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
113
FIGURE 9.5
CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame Hourly Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
downtrend. However, in order to increase the success of this trade, we
want to make sure that CHF/JPY is also in a downtrend on a daily basis.
Taking a look at Figure 9.6, we see that CHF/JPY is indeed trading
below the 200-day simple moving average with the 20-day SMA crossing
below the 100-day SMA. This conﬁrms the bearish momentum in the cur-
rency pair. So as a day trader, we move on to the 15-minute chart to pin-
point entry levels. Figure 9.7 is the 15-minute chart; the horizontal line is
the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement of the earlier downtrend. We see
that CHF/JPY broke above the horizontal line on May 11, 2005; however,
rather than buying into a potential breakout trade, the bearish big picture
reﬂected on the hourly and daily charts suggests a contrarian trade at this
point. In fact, there were two instances shown in Figure 9.7 where the cur-
rency pair broke above the Fibonacci level only to then trade signiﬁcantly
lower. Disciplined day traders would use those opportunities to fade the
breakout.
The importance of multiple time frame analysis cannot be overesti-
mated. Thinking about the big picture ﬁrst will keep traders out of numer-
ous dangerous trades. The majority of new traders in the market are range
traders for the simple fact that buying at the low and selling at the high is an
easy concept to grasp. Of course, this strategy does work, but traders also
need to be mindful of the trading environment that they are participating
in. Looking back to Chapter 8, traders should try to range trade only when


--- PAGE 130 ---
114
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.6
CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 9.7
CHF/JPY Multiple Time Frame 15-Minute Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 131 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
115
the conditions for a range-bound market are met. The most important con-
dition (but certainly not the only one) is to look for ADX to be less than 25
and ideally trending downward.
FADING THE DOUBLE ZEROS
One of the most widely overlooked yet lucrative areas of trading is market
structure. Developing a keen understanding of micro structure and dynam-
ics allows traders to gain an unbelievable advantage and is probably one of
the most reliable tactics for proﬁting from intraday ﬂuctuations. Develop-
ing a feel for and understanding of market dynamics is key to proﬁtably tak-
ing advantage of short-term ﬂuctuations. In foreign exchange trading this is
especially critical, as the primary inﬂuence of intraday price action is order
ﬂow. Given the fact that most individual traders are not privy to sell-side
bank order ﬂow, day traders looking to proﬁt from short-term ﬂuctuations
need to learn how to identify and anticipate price zones where large or-
der ﬂows should be triggered. This technique is very efﬁcient for intraday
traders as it allows them to get on the same side as the market maker.
When trading intraday, it is impossible to look for bounces off of every
support or resistance level and expect to be proﬁtable. The key to success-
ful intraday trading requires that we be more selective and enter only at
those levels where a reaction is more likely. Trading off psychologically im-
portant levels such as the double zeros or round numbers is one good way
of identifying such opportunities. Double zeros represent numbers where
the last two digits are zeros—for example, 107.00 in the USD/JPY or 1.2800
in the EUR/USD. After noticing how many times a currency pair would
bounce off of double zero support or resistance levels intraday despite the
underlying trend, we have noticed that the bounces are usually much big-
ger and more relevant than rallies off other areas. This type of reaction is
perfect for intraday FX traders as it gives them the opportunity to make 50
pips while risking only 15 to 20 pips.
Implementing this methodology is not difﬁcult, but it does require in-
dividual traders to develop a solid feel for dealing room and market partic-
ipant psychology. The idea behind why this methodology works is simple.
Large banks with access to conditional order ﬂow have a very distinct ad-
vantage over other market participants. The banks’ order books give them
direct insight into potential reactions at different price levels. Dealers will
often use this strategic information themselves to put on short-term posi-
tions for their own accounts.
Market participants as a whole tend to put conditional orders near
or around the same levels. While stop-loss orders are usually placed


--- PAGE 132 ---
116
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
just beyond the round numbers, traders will cluster their take-proﬁt orders
at the round number. The reason why this occurs is because traders are hu-
mans and humans tend to think in round numbers. As a result, take-proﬁt
orders have a very high tendency of being placed at the double zero level.
Since the FX market is a nonstop continuous market, speculators also use
stop and limit orders much more frequently than in other markets. Large
banks with access to conditional order ﬂow, like stops and limits, actively
seek to exploit these clusterings of positions to basically gun stops. The
strategy of fading the double zeros attempts to put traders on the same side
as market makers and basically positions traders for a quick contra-trend
move at the double zero level.
This trade is most proﬁtable when there are other technical indicators
that conﬁrm the signiﬁcance of the double zero level.
Strategy Rules
Long
1. First, locate a currency pair that is trading well below its intraday
20-period simple moving average on a 10- or 15-minute chart.
2. Next, enter a long position several pips below the ﬁgure (no more
than 10).
3. Place an initial protective stop no more than 20 pips below the entry
price.
4. When the position is proﬁtable by double the amount that you risked,
close half of the position and move your stop on the remaining portion
of the trade to breakeven. Trail your stop as the price moves in your
favor.
Short
1. First, locate a currency pair that is trading well above its intraday
20-period simple moving average on a 10- or 15-minute chart.
2. Next, short the currency pair several pips above the ﬁgure (no more
than 10).
3. Place an initial protective stop no more than 20 pips above the entry
price.
4. When the position is proﬁtable by double the amount that you risked,
close half of the position and move your stop on the remaining portion
of the trade to breakeven. Trail your stop as the price moves in your
favor.


--- PAGE 133 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
117
Market Conditions
This strategy works best when the move happens without any major eco-
nomic number as a catalyst—in other words, in quieter market conditions.
It is used most successfully for pairs with tighter trading ranges, crosses,
and commodity currencies. This strategy does work for the majors but un-
der quieter market conditions since the stops are relatively tight.
Further Optimization
The psychologically important round number levels have even greater sig-
niﬁcance if they coincide with a key technical level. Therefore the strategy
tends to have an even higher probability of success when other important
support or resistance levels converge at the ﬁgure, such as moving aver-
ages, key Fibonacci levels, and Bollinger bands, just to name a few.
Examples
So let us take a look at some of the examples of this strategy in action.
The ﬁrst example that we will go over is Figure 9.8, a 15-minute chart
of the EUR/USD. According to the rules of the strategy, we see that the
EUR/USD broke down and was trading well below its 20-period moving
average. Prices continued to trend lower, moving toward 1.2800, which is
FIGURE 9.8
EUR/USD Double Zeros Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 134 ---
118
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
our double zero number. In accordance with the rules, we place an entry
order a few pips below the breakeven number at 1.2795. Our order is trig-
gered and we put our stop 20 pips away at 1.2775. The currency pair hits a
low of 1.2786 before moving higher. We then sell half of the position when
the currency pair rallies by double the amount that we risked at 1.2835. The
stop on the remaining half of the position is then moved to breakeven at
1.2795. We proceed to trail the stop. The trailing stop can be done using a
variety of methods including a monetary or percentage basis. We choose to
trail the stop by a two-bar low for a really short-term trade and end up get-
ting out of the other half of the position at 1.2831. Therefore on this trade
we earned 40 pips on the ﬁrst position and 36 pips on the second position.
The next example is for USD/JPY. In Figure 9.9, we see that USD/JPY
is trading well below its 20-period moving average on a 10-minute chart
and is headed toward the 105 double zero level. This trade is particularly
strong because the 105 level is very important in USD/JPY. Not only is it a
psychologically important level, but it also served as an important support
and resistance level throughout 2004 and into early 2005. The 105 level is
also the 23.6 percent Fibonacci retracement of the May 14, 2004, high and
January 17, 2005, low. All of this provides a strong signal that lots of spec-
ulators may have taken proﬁt orders at that level and that a contra-trend
trade is very likely. As a result, we place our limit order a few pips below
105.00 at 104.95. The trade is triggered and we place our stop at 104.75.
FIGURE 9.9
USD/JPY Double Zeros Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 135 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
119
The currency pair hits a low of 104.88 before moving higher. We then sell
half of our position when the currency pair rallies by double the amount
that we risked at 105.35. The stop on the remaining half of the position is
then moved to breakeven at 104.95. We proceed to trail the stop by a ﬁve-
bar low to ﬁlter out noise on the shorter time frame. We end up selling the
other half of the position at 105.71. As a result on this trade, we earned
40 pips on the ﬁrst position and 76 pips on the second position. The reason
why this second trade was more proﬁtable than the one in the ﬁrst example
is because the double zero level was also a signiﬁcant technical level.
Making sure that the double zero level is a signiﬁcant level is a key el-
ement of ﬁltering for good trades. The next example, shown in Figure 9.10,
is USD/CAD on a 15-minute chart. The great thing about this trade is that it
is a triple zero level rather than just a double zero level. Triple zero levels
hold even more signiﬁcance than double zero levels because of their less
frequent occurrence. In Figure 9.10, we see that USD/CAD is also trading
well below its 20-period moving average and heading toward 1.2000. We
look to go long a few pips below the double zero level at 1.1995. We place
our stop 20 pips away at 1.1975. The currency pair hits a low of 1.1980 be-
fore moving higher. We then sell half of our position when the currency
pair rallies by double the amount that we risked at 1.2035. The stop on the
remaining half of the position is then moved to breakeven at 1.1995. We
proceed to trail the stop once again by the two-bar low and end up exiting
FIGURE 9.10
USD/CAD Double Zeros Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 136 ---
120
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the second half of the position at 1.2081. As a result, we earned 40 pips on
the ﬁrst position and 86 pips on the second position. Once again, this trade
worked particularly well because 1.2000 was a triple zero level.
Although the examples covered in this chapter are all to the long side,
the strategy also works to the short side.
WAITING FOR THE REAL DEAL
The lack of volume data in the FX market has forced day traders to de-
velop different strategies that rely less on the level of demand and more on
the micro structure of the market. One of the most common characteris-
tics that day traders try to exploit is the market’s 24-hour around-the-clock
nature. Although the market is open for trading throughout the course of
the day, the extent of market activity during each trading session can vary
signiﬁcantly.
Traditionally, trading tends to be the quietest during the Asian market
hours, as we indicated in Chapter 4. This means that currencies such as the
EUR/USD and GBP/USD tend to trade within a very tight range during these
hours. According to the Bank for International Settlements’ Triennial Cen-
tral Bank Survey of the FX market published in September 2004, the United
Kingdom is the most active trading center, capturing 31 percent of total vol-
ume. Adding in Germany, France, and Switzerland, European trading as a
whole accounts for 42 percent of total FX trading. The United States, on
the other hand, is second only to the United Kingdom for the title of most
active trading center, but that amounts to only approximately 19 percent
of total turnover. This makes the London open exceptionally important be-
cause it gives the majority of traders in the market an opportunity to take
advantage of events or announcements that may have occurred during late
U.S. trading or in the overnight Asian session. This becomes even more
critical on days when the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) of the
Federal Reserve meets to discuss and announce monetary policy because
the announcement occurs at 2:15 p.m. New York time, which is past the
London close.
The British pound trades most actively against the U.S. dollar dur-
ing the European and London trading hours. There is also active trad-
ing during the U.S./European overlap, but besides those time frames, the
pair tends to trade relatively lightly because the majority of GBP/USD trad-
ing is done through U.K. and European market makers. This provides a
great opportunity for day traders to capture the initial directional intraday
real move that generally occurs within the ﬁrst few hours of trading in the
London session. This strategy exploits the common perception that U.K.
traders are notorious stop hunters. This means that the initial movement at


--- PAGE 137 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
121
the London open may not always be the real one. Since U.K. and European
dealers are the primary market makers for the GBP/USD, they have tremen-
dous insight into the extent of actual supply and demand for the pair. The
trading strategy of waiting for the real deal ﬁrst sets up when interbank
dealing desks survey their books at the onset of trading and use their client
data to trigger close stops on both sides of the markets to gain the pip dif-
ferential. Once these stops are taken out and the books are cleared, the
real directional move in the GBP/USD will begin to occur, at which point
we look for the rules of this strategy to be met before entering into a long
or short position. This strategy works best following the U.S. open or after
a major economic release. With this strategy you are looking to wait for
the noise in the markets to settle down and to trade the real market price
action afterward.
Strategy Rules
Long
1. Early European trading in GBP/USD begins around 1:00 a.m. New York
time. Look for the pair to make a new range low of at least 25 pips
above the opening price (the range is deﬁned as the price action be-
tween the Frankfurt and London power hour of 1 a.m. New York time
to 2 a.m. New York time).
2. The pair then reverses and penetrates the high.
3. Place an entry order to buy 10 pips above the high of the range.
4. Place a protective stop no more than 20 pips away from your entry.
5. If the position moves lower by double the amount that you risked,
cover half and trail a stop on the remaining position.
Short
1. GBP/USD opens in Europe and trades more than 25 pips above the high
of the Frankfurt and London power hour.
2. The pair then reverses and penetrates the low.
3. Place an entry order to sell 10 pips below the low of the range.
4. Place a protective stop no more than 20 pips away from your entry.
5. If the position moves lower by double the amount that you risked,
cover half and trail a stop on the remaining position.
Examples
Let us go ahead and take a look at some examples of this strategy in ac-
tion. Figure 9.11 is a textbook example of the strategy of waiting for the
real deal. We see that the GBP/USD breaks upward on the London open,


--- PAGE 138 ---
122
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.11
GBP/USD May 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
reaching a high of 1.8912 approximately two hours into trading. The cur-
rency pair then begins to trend lower ahead of the U.S. market open and
we position for the trade by putting an entry order to short 10 pips below
the Frankfurt open to the London open range of 1.8804 at 1.8794. Our stop
is then placed 20 pips higher at 1.8814, while our take-proﬁt order is placed
at 1.8754, which is double the amount risked. Once the take-proﬁt order on
the ﬁrst lot is fulﬁlled, we move the stop to breakeven at 1.8794 and trail
the stop by the two-bar high. The second lot eventually gets stopped out at
1.8740, and we end up earning 40 pips on the ﬁrst position and 54 pips on
the second position.
The next example is shown in Figure 9.12. In this example, we also see
the GBP/USD break upward on the London open, reaching a high of 1.8977
right at the U.S. open. The currency pair then begins to trend lower during
the early U.S. session, breaking the Frankfurt open to the London open
range low of 1.8851. Our entry point is 10 pips below that level at 1.8841.
Our short position is triggered, and we place our stop 20 pips higher at
1.8861 and the ﬁrst take-proﬁt level at 1.8801, which is double the amount
risked. Once our limit order is triggered, we move the stop to breakeven at
1.8841 and trail the stop by the two-bar high. The second lot gets stopped
out at 1.8789, and we end up earning 40 pips on the ﬁrst position and 52
pips on the second position.
The third example is shown in Figure 9.13. In this example, we also
see the GBP/USD break upward on the London open, reaching a high of


--- PAGE 139 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
123
FIGURE 9.12
GBP/USD April 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 9.13
GBP/USD March 2005 Real Deal Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 140 ---
124
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
1.9023 right before the U.S. FOMC meeting. The currency pair then breaks
lower on the back of the meeting, penetrating the Frankfurt open to the
London open range low of 1.8953. Our entry order is already placed 10
pips below that level at 1.8943. Our short position is triggered and we
place our stop 20 pips higher at 1.8963 and the ﬁrst take-proﬁt level at
1.8903, which is double the amount risked. Once our limit order is trig-
gered, we move the stop to breakeven at 1.8943 and trail the stop by
the two-bar high. The second lot gets stopped out at 1.8853, and we
end up earning 40 pips on the ﬁrst position and 90 pips on the second
position.
INSIDE DAY BREAKOUT PLAY
Throughout this book, volatility trading has been emphasized as one of the
most popular strategies employed by professional traders. There are many
ways to interpret changes in volatilities, but one of the simplest strategies is
actually a visual one and requires nothing more than a keen eye. Although
this is a strategy that is very popular in the world of professional trading,
new traders are frequently amazed by its ease, accuracy, and reliability.
Breakout traders can identify inside days with nothing more than a basic
candlestick chart.
An inside day is deﬁned as a day where the daily range has been con-
tained within the prior day’s trading range, or, in other words, the day’s
high and low do not exceed the previous day’s high and low. There need to
be at least two inside days before the volatility play can be implemented.
The more inside days, the higher the likelihood of an upside surge in volatil-
ity, or a breakout scenario. This type of strategy is best employed on daily
charts, but the longer the time frame, the more signiﬁcant the breakout op-
portunity. Some traders use the inside day strategy on hourly charts, which
does work to some success, but identifying inside days on daily charts
tends to lead to an even greater probability of success. For day traders
looking for inside days on hourly charts, chances of a solid breakout in-
crease if the contraction precedes the London or U.S. market opens. The
key is to predict a valid breakout and not get caught in a false breakout
move. Traders using the daily charts could look for breakouts ahead of ma-
jor economic releases for the speciﬁc currency pair. This strategy works
with all currencies pairs, but has less frequent instances of false break-
outs in the tighter range pairs such as the EUR/GBP, USD/CAD, EUR/CHF,
EUR/CAD, and AUD/CAD.


--- PAGE 141 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
125
Strategy Rules
Long
1. Identify a currency pair where the daily range has been contained
within the prior day’s range for at least two days (we are looking for
multiple inside days).
2. Buy 10 pips above the high of the previous inside day.
3. Place a stop and reverse order for two lots at least 10 pips below the
low of the nearest inside day.
4. Take proﬁt when prices reach double the amount risked or begin to
trail the stop at that level.
Protect against false breakouts: If the stop and reverse order is triggered,
place a stop at least 10 pips above the high of the nearest inside day and
protect any proﬁts larger than what you risked with a trailing stop.
Short
1. Identify a currency pair where the daily range has been contained
within the prior day’s range for at least two days (we are looking for
multiple inside days).
2. Sell 10 pips below the low of the previous inside day.
3. Place a stop and reverse order for two lots at least 10 pips above the
high of the nearest inside day.
4. Take proﬁt when prices reach double the amount risked or begin to
trail the stop at that level.
Protect against false breakouts: If the stop and reverse order is triggered,
place a stop at least 10 pips below the low of the nearest inside day and
protect any proﬁts larger than what you risked with a trailing stop.
Further Optimization
For further optimization, technical formations can be used in conjunction
with the visual identiﬁcation to place a higher weight on a speciﬁc direction
of the breakout. For example, if the inside days are building and contract-
ing toward the top of a recent range such as a bullish ascending triangle
formation, the breakout has a higher likelihood of occurring to the upside.
The opposite scenario is also true: if inside days are building and contract-
ing toward the bottom of a recent range and we begin to see that a bearish


--- PAGE 142 ---
126
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
descending triangle is in formation, the breakout has a higher likelihood
of occurring to the downside. Aside from triangles, other technical factors
that can be considered include signiﬁcant support and resistance levels.
For example, if there are signiﬁcant Fibonacci and moving average sup-
port zones resting below the inside day levels, this indicates either a higher
likelihood of an upside breakout or at least a higher probability of a false
breakout to the downside.
Examples
Let us take a look at a few examples. Figure 9.14 is a daily chart of the euro
against the British pound, or the EUR/GBP. The two inside days are identi-
ﬁed on the chart and it is clear visually that both of those days’ ranges, in-
cluding the highs and lows, are contained within the previous day’s range.
In accordance with our rules, we place an order to go long 10 pips above
the high of the previous inside day at 0.6634 and an order to sell 10 pips
below the low of the previous inside day at 0.6579. Our long order gets
triggered two bars after the most recent inside day. We then proceed to
place a stop and reverse order 10 pips below the low of the most recent
inside day at 0.6579. So basically, we went long at 0.6634 with a stop at
0.6579, which means that we are risking 45 pips. When prices reach our
target level of double the amount risked (90 pips) or 0.6724, we have two
FIGURE 9.14
EUR/GBP Inside Day Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 143 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
127
choices—either close out the entire trade or begin trailing the stop. More
conservative traders should probably square positions at this point, while
more aggressive traders could look for more proﬁt potential. We choose to
close out the trade for a 90-pip proﬁt, but those who stayed in and weath-
ered a bit of volatility could have taken advantage of another 100 pips of
proﬁts three weeks later.
Figure 9.15 is another example of inside day trading, this time using the
daily chart of the New Zealand dollar against the U.S. dollar (NZD/USD).
The difference between this example and the previous one is that our stop
and reverse order actually gets triggered, indicating that the ﬁrst move was
a false breakout. The two inside days are labeled on the chart. In accor-
dance with our rules, after identifying the inside days, we place an order
to buy on the break of the high of the previous inside day and an order
to sell on the break of the low of the previous inside day. The high on
the ﬁrst or previous inside day is 0.6628. We place an order to go long at
0.6638 or to go short at 0.6618. Our long order gets triggered on the ﬁrst
day of the break at 0.6638 and we place a stop and reverse order 10 pips
below the low of the most recent inside day (or the daily candle before the
breakout), which is 0.6560. However, instead of continuing the breakout,
the pair reverses and we close our ﬁrst position at 0.6560 with a 78-pip loss.
We then enter into a new short position with the reverse order at 0.6560.
The new stop is then 10 pips above the high of the most recent inside day at
FIGURE 9.15
NZD/USD Inside Day Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 144 ---
128
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
0.6619. When NZD/USD moves by double the initial amount risked, conser-
vative traders can take proﬁt on the entire position while aggressive traders
can trail the stop using various methods, which may be dependent on how
wide the trading range is. In this example, since the daily trading range
is fairly wide, we choose to close the position once the price reaches our
limit of 0.6404 for a proﬁt of 156 pips and a total proﬁt on the entire trade of
78 pips.
The ﬁnal example uses technicals to help determine a directional bias
of the inside day breakout. Figure 9.16 is a daily chart of EUR/CAD. The
inside days are once again identiﬁed directly on the chart. The presence of
higher lows suggests that the breakout could very well be to the upside.
Adding in the MACD histogram to the bottom of the chart, we see that
the histogram is also in positive territory right when the inside days are
forming. As such, we choose to opt for an upside breakout trade based on
technical indicators. In accordance with the rules, we go long 10 pips above
the high of the previous inside day at 1.6008. Our short trade gets triggered
ﬁrst, but then our stop and reverse order kicks in. Our long trade is then
triggered and we place our new stop order 10 pips below the low of the
most recent inside day at 1.5905. When prices move by double the amount
that we risked to 1.6208, we exit the entire position for a 200-pip proﬁt.
With the inside day breakout strategy, the risk is generally pretty high
if done on daily charts, but the proﬁt potentials following the breakout are
FIGURE 9.16
EUR/CAD Inside Day Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 145 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
129
usually fairly large as well. More aggressive traders can also trade more
than one position, which would allow them to lock in proﬁts on the ﬁrst half
of the position when prices move by double the amount risked and then
trail the stop on the remaining position. Generally these breakout trades
are precursors to big trends, and using trailing stops would allow traders
to participate in the trend move while also banking some proﬁts.
THE FADER
More often than not, traders will ﬁnd themselves faced with a potential
breakout scenario, position for it, and then only end up seeing the trade
fail miserably and have prices revert back to range trading. In fact, even
if prices do manage to break out above a signiﬁcant level, a continuation
move is not guaranteed. If this level is very signiﬁcant, we frequently see
interbank dealers or other traders try to push prices beyond those levels
momentarily in order to run stops. Breakout levels are very signiﬁcant lev-
els, and for this very reason there is no hard-and-fast rule as to how much
force is needed to carry prices beyond levels into a sustainable trend.
Trading breakouts at key levels can involve a lot of risk and as a re-
sult, false breakout scenarios appear more frequently than actual breakout
scenarios. Sometimes prices will test the resistance level once, twice, or
even three times before breaking out. This has fostered the development
of a large contingent of contra-trend traders who look only to fade break-
outs in the currency markets. Yet fading every breakout can also result in
some signiﬁcant losses because once a real breakout occurs, the trend is
generally strong and long-lasting. So what this boils down to is that traders
need a methodology for screening out consolidation patterns for trades
that have a higher potential of resulting in a false breakout. The following
rules provide a good basis for screening such trades. The fader strategy is
a variation of the waiting for the real deal strategy. It uses the daily charts
to identify the range-bound environment and the hourly charts to pinpoint
entry levels.
Strategy Rules
Long
1. Locate a currency pair whose 14-period ADX is less than 35. Ideally
the ADX should also be trending downward, indicating that the trend
is weakening further.
2. Wait for the market to break below the previous day’s low by at least
15 pips.


--- PAGE 146 ---
130
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
3. Place an entry order to buy 15 pips above the previous day’s high.
4. After getting ﬁlled, place your initial stop no more than 30 pips away.
5. Take proﬁt on the position when prices increase by double your risk,
or 60 pips.
Short
1. Locate a currency pair whose 14-period ADX is less than 35. Ideally
the ADX should also be trending downward, indicating that the trend
is weakening further.
2. Look for a move above the previous day’s high by at least 15 pips.
3. Place an entry order to sell 15 pips below the previous day’s low.
4. Once ﬁlled, place the initial protective stop no more than 30 pips above
your entry.
5. Take proﬁts on the position when it runs 60 pips in your favor.
Further Optimization
The false breakout strategy works best when there are no signiﬁcant eco-
nomic data scheduled for release that could trigger sharp unexpected
movements. For example, prices often consolidate ahead of the U.S.
nonfarm payrolls release. Generally speaking, they are consolidating for
a reason and that reason is because the market is undecided and is either
positioned already or wants to wait to react following that release. Either
way, there is a higher likelihood that any breakout on the back of the re-
lease would be a real one and not one that you want to fade. This strategy
works best with currency pairs that are less volatile and have narrower
trading ranges.
Examples
Figure 9.17 is an hourly chart of the EUR/USD. Applying the rules just
given, we see that the 14-period ADX dips below 35, at which point we
begin looking for prices to break below the previous day’s low of 1.2166
by 15 pips. Once that occurs, we look for a break back above the previous
day’s high of 1.2254 by 15 pips, at which point we enter into position at
1.2269. The stop is placed 30 pips below the entry price at 1.2239, with the
limit exit order placed 60 pips above the entry at 1.2329. The exit order gets
triggered a few hours later for a total proﬁt of 60 pips with a risk of 30 pips.
Figure 9.18 is an example of the fader trading strategy on the short
side. Applying the rules to the hourly chart of the GBP/USD, we see that the


--- PAGE 147 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
131
FIGURE 9.17
EUR/USD Fader Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 9.18
GBP/USD Fader Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 148 ---
132
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
14-period ADX dips below 35, at which point we begin to look for prices to
break 15 pips above the previous day’s high of 1.8865 or below the previous
day’s low of 1.8760. The break above occurs ﬁrst, at which time we look for
prices to reverse and break back below the previous day’s low. A few hours
later, the break occurs and we sell 15 pips below the previous day’s low at
1.8745. We then place our stop 30 pips away at 1.8775 with a take proﬁt
order 60 pips lower at 1.8685. The limit exit order gets triggered, and, as
indicated on the chart, the trade was proﬁtable.
FILTERING FALSE BREAKOUTS
Trading breakouts can be a very rewarding but frustrating endeavor as
many breakouts have a tendency to fail. A major reason why this occurs
frequently in the foreign exchange market is because the market is much
more technically driven than many of the other markets and as a result
there are many market participants who intentionally look to break pairs
out in order to suck in other nonsuspecting traders. In an effort to ﬁlter out
potential false breakouts, a price action screener should be used to iden-
tify those breakouts that have a higher probability of success. The rules
behind this strategy are speciﬁcally developed to take advantage of strong
trending markets that make new highs that then proceed to fail by taking
out a recent low and then reverse again to make other new highs. This type
of setup tends to have a very high success rate as it allows traders to en-
ter strongly trending markets after weaker players have been ﬂushed out,
only to have real money players reenter the market and push the pair up to
make major highs.
Strategy Rules
Long
1. Look for a currency pair that is making a 20-day high.
2. Look for the pair to reverse over the next three days to make a two-day
low.
3. Buy the pair if it takes out the 20-day high within three days of making
the two-day low.
4. Place the initial stop a few pips below the original two-day low that
was identiﬁed in step 2.
5. Protect any proﬁts with a trailing stop or take proﬁt by double the
amount risked.


--- PAGE 149 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
133
Short
1. Look for a currency pair that is making a 20-day low.
2. Look for the pair to reverse over the next three days to make a two-day
high.
3. Sell the pair if it trades below the 20-day low within three days of mak-
ing the two-day high.
4. Risk up to a few ticks above the original two-day high that was identi-
ﬁed in step 2.
5. Protect proﬁts with a trailing stop or take proﬁt by double the amount
risked.
Examples
Take a look at our ﬁrst example in Figure 9.19. The daily chart of the
GBP/USD shows that the currency pair made a new 20-day high on Novem-
ber 17 at 1.8631. This means that the currency pair gets onto our radar
screens and we prepare to look for the pair to make a new two-day low
and then rally back beyond the previous 20-day high of 1.8631 over the next
three days. We see this occur on November 23, at which time we enter a
few pips above the high at 1.8640. We then place our stop a few pips below
FIGURE 9.19
GBP/USD Filtering False Breakouts Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 150 ---
134
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the two-day low of 1.8472 at 1.8465. As the currency moves in our favor,
we have two choices: either to take proﬁts by double the amount that we
risked, which would be 336 pips in proﬁts, or to use a trailing stop such as
a two-bar low. We decide to trail by the two-bar low and end up getting out
of the position at 1.9362 on December 8 for a total proﬁt of 722 pips in two
weeks.
Figure 9.20 shows another example of this strategy in the works. The
daily chart of USD/CAD shows that the currency pair made a new 20-day
high on April 21 at 1.3636. This means that the currency pair is now on our
radar screens and we are looking for the pair to make a new two-day low
and then retrace back below the previous 20-day high of 1.3636 over the
next three days. We see this occur on April 23, at which time we enter a
few pips above the high at 1.3645. We then place our stop a few pips below
the original two-day low of 1.3514 at 1.3505. As the currency moves in our
favor, we have two choices: either to take proﬁts by double the amount
that we risked, which would be 280 pips in proﬁts, or to use a trailing stop
such as a two-bar low. Using a two-bar low trailing stop, the trade would
have been closed at 1.3686 for a 41-pip proﬁt. Alternatively, the 280-pip
limit would have been executed on May 10.
Our last example is on the short side. Figure 9.21 is a daily chart of
USD/JPY. The chart illustrates that USD/JPY made a new 20-day low on
October 11 below 109.30. The currency pair then proceeded to make a
FIGURE 9.20
USD/CAD Filtering False Breakouts Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 151 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
135
FIGURE 9.21
USD/JPY Filtering False Breakouts Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
new two-day high on October 13 of 110.21. Prices then reversed over the
next two days to break below the original 20-day low, at which point our
sell order at 109.20 (a few pips below the 20-day low) was triggered. We
placed our stop a few pips above the two-day high at 110.30. As the cur-
rency moves in our favor, we have two choices: either to take proﬁts by
double the amount that we risked, which would be 220 pips in proﬁts, or
to use a trailing stop such as a two-bar high. The two-bar proﬁt would have
the trade exited at 106.76 on November 2, while the 220-pip proﬁt would
have the trade exited at 107.00 on October 25.
CHANNEL STRATEGY
Channel trading is less exotic but nevertheless works very well with cur-
rencies. The primary reason is because currencies rarely spend much time
in tight trading ranges and have the tendency to develop strong trends. By
just going through a few charts, traders can see that channels can easily
be identiﬁed and occur frequently. A common scenario would be channel
trading during the Asian session and a breakout in either the London or the
U.S. session. There are many instances where economic releases are trig-
gers for a break of the channel. Therefore it is imperative that traders keep
on top of economic releases. If a channel has formed, a big U.S. number is
expected to be released, and the currency pair is at the top of a channel,


--- PAGE 152 ---
136
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the probability of a breakout is high, so traders should be looking to buy
the breakout, not fade it.
Channels are created when we draw a trend line and then draw a line
that is parallel to the trend line. Most if not all of the price activity of the
currency pair should fall between the two channel lines. We will seek to
identify situations where the price is trading within a narrow channel, and
then trade in the direction of a breakout from the channel. This strategy will
be particularly effective when used prior to a fundamental market event
such as the release of major economic news, or when used just prior to the
open of a major ﬁnancial market.
Here are the rules for long trades using this technique.
1. First, identify a channel on either an intraday or a daily chart. The price
should be contained within a narrow range.
2. Enter long as the price breaks above the upper channel line.
3. Place a stop just under the upper channel line.
4. Trail your stop higher as the price moves in your favor.
Examples
Let us now examine a few examples. The ﬁrst is a USD/CAD 15-minute
chart shown in Figure 9.22. The total range of the channel is approximately
FIGURE 9.22
USD/CAD Channel Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 153 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
137
30 pips. In accordance with our strategy, we place entry orders 10 pips
above and below the channel at 1.2395 and 1.2349. The order to go long
gets triggered ﬁrst and almost immediately we place a stop order 10 pips
under the upper channel line at 1.2375. USD/CAD then proceeds to rally
and reaches our target of double the range at 1.2455. A trailing stop also
could have been used, similar to the ones that we talked about in our risk
management section in Chapter 8.
The next example, shown in Figure 9.23, is a 30-minute chart of
EUR/GBP. The total range between the two lines is 15 pips. In accordance
with our strategy, we place entry orders 10 pips above and below the chan-
nel at 0.6796 and 0.6763. The order to go long gets triggered ﬁrst and almost
immediately we place a stop order 10 pips under the upper channel line at
0.6776. EUR/GBP then proceeds to rally and reaches our target of double
the range at 0.6826.
Figure 9.24 is a 5-minute chart of the EUR/USD. The total range be-
tween the two lines is 13 pips over the course of four hours. The channel
actually also occurs between the European and U.S. open ahead of the U.S.
retail sales report. In accordance with our strategy, we place entry orders
10 pips above and below the channel at 1.2785 and 1.2752. The order to go
short gets triggered ﬁrst, and almost immediately we place a stop order 10
pips above the lower channel line at 1.2772. The EUR/USD then proceeds to
sell off signiﬁcantly and hits our target of double the range of 26 pips. More
FIGURE 9.23
EUR/GBP Channel Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 154 ---
138
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.24
EUR/USD Channel Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
aggressive traders also could have trailed their stops to take advantage of
what eventually became a much more extensive move lower.
PERFECT ORDER
A perfect order in moving averages is deﬁned as a set of moving averages
that are in sequential order. For an uptrend, a perfect order would be a situ-
ation in which the 10-day simple moving average (SMA) is at a higher price
level than the 20-day SMA, which is higher than the 50-day SMA. Mean-
while, the 100-day SMA would be below the 50-day SMA, while the 200-day
SMA would be below the 100-day SMA. In a downtrend, the opposite is
true, where the 200-day SMA is at the highest level and the 10-day SMA is
at the lowest level. Having the moving averages stacked up in sequential
order is generally a strong indicator of a trending environment. Not only
does it indicate that the momentum is on the side of the trend, but the
moving averages also serve as multiple levels of support. To optimize the
perfect order strategy, traders should also look for ADX to be greater than
20 and trending upward. Entry and exit levels are difﬁcult to determine
with this strategy, but we generally want to stay in the trade as long as the
perfect order holds and exit once the perfect order no longer holds. Perfect


--- PAGE 155 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
139
orders do not happen often, and the premise of this strategy is to capture
the perfect order when it ﬁrst happens.
The perfect order seeks to take advantage of a trending environment
near the beginning of the trend. Here are the rules for using this technique.
1. Look for a currency pair with moving averages in perfect order.
2. Look for ADX pointing upward, ideally greater than 20.
3. Buy ﬁve candles after the initial formation of the perfect order (if it still
holds).
4. The initial stop is the low on the day of the initial crossover for longs
and the high for shorts.
5. Exit the position when the perfect order no longer holds.
Examples
Figure 9.25 is a daily chart of the EUR/USD. On October 27, 2004, moving
averages in the EUR/USD formed a sequential perfect order. We enter into
the position ﬁve candles after the initial formation at 1.2820. Our initial stop
is at the October 27, 2004 low of 1.2695. The pair continues to trend higher,
and we exit the position when the perfect order no longer holds and the
10-day SMA moves below the 20-day SMA. This occurs on December 22,
FIGURE 9.25
EUR/USD Perfect Order Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 156 ---
140
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
2005, when prices open at 1.3370. The total proﬁt on this trade is 550 pips.
We risked 125 pips on the trade.
The next example is USD/CHF. In Figure 9.26, the perfect order occurs
on November 3, 2004. In accordance with our rules, we enter into the trade
ﬁve candles after the initial formation at 1.1830. Our stop is at the Novem-
ber 3, 2004 high (for a short trade) of 1.1927. The pair then proceeds to
continue to trend lower, and we exit the position when the perfect order
no longer holds and the 20-day SMA moves below the 10-day SMA. This
occurs on December 16, 2005, when prices open at 1.1420. The total proﬁt
on this trade is 410 pips. We risked 97 pips.
Figure 9.27 is a perfect order formation in the USD/CAD. The formation
materialized on September 30, 2004. We count ﬁve bars forward and enter
into the position at 1.2588 with a stop at 1.2737. The pair then proceeds to
sell off and we look to exit the position when the perfect order formation
no longer holds. This occurs on December 9, 2005, at which time we buy
back our position at 1.2145 for a 443-pip proﬁt while risking 149 pips.
HOW TO TRADE NEWS RELEASES
One of the most popular methods of trading currencies is to trade news
releases. This type of strategy is intriguing to many people because of the
instant gratiﬁcation. You lay on the trade minutes before the release, your
FIGURE 9.26
USD/CHF Perfect Order Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 157 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
141
FIGURE 9.27
USD/CAD Perfect Order Example
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
heart pumps when the clock ticks within 60 seconds of the number coming
out, and when it does, you feel either an instant sense of elation, the trading
high, or an instant sense of frustration. This is great for traders who like a
lot of action within a very short period of time. Trading news is based on
the idea that when an economic number deviates signiﬁcantly from the
consensus forecast, there is usually a knee-jerk reaction accompanied by
decent follow-through. However, there are many different ways to trade
news releases, and if done incorrectly, it can lead to more losers than win-
ners. The ﬁrst strategy that I use is to place a trade before the number is
released, the second is to take the trade only after the news release hits the
wires, and the third is to do a combination of both.
One of the biggest advantages of proactive trading is the risk-to-reward
ratio, which is usually very good because the strategy entails entering into
a position 15 to 20 minutes before the number is released. The reason we
do not wait until 5 minutes before the release is because spreads usually
widen, and some brokers will make execution difﬁcult. Once the economic
number is out, the spike that is driven by the data creates an opportunity
where proﬁts can be taken on a portion of a position or the entire position.
If your view on the economic data proves to be wrong, the stop would be
hit almost immediately; in other words, you are either right or out.
Here are some general guidelines for proactive trading (use 5-minute
charts).


--- PAGE 158 ---
142
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Strategy Rules for Proactive Trading
Long
1. Enter into a position no more than 20 minutes before a major news
report will be released.
Rule #1 gets you into the position when spreads are still relatively tight.
Taking the trade 20 minutes before a release also gives you the
opportunity to focus on the event risk and not any other news.
2. Place a stop 10 pips below the range low or 30 pips below your entry
price, whichever is closer. The range is deﬁned as the past two hours
of price action, but if the range is too small, look for the more obvious
swing high or low.
Rule #2 keeps the risk low.
3. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
the amount risked.
Rule #3 is to bank proﬁts when you have them and play only with the
house’s money on the second half of the position.
4. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day simple moving
average (SMA) or set a hard stop of three times risk.
Rule #4, using the 20-day SMA, allows you to capitalize on as much of
the move as possible.
Short
1. Enter into a position no more than 20 minutes before a major news
report will be released.
2. Place a stop 10 pips above the range high or 30 pips above your entry
price, whichever is closer. The range is deﬁned as the past two hours
of price action, but if the range is too small, look for the more obvious
swing high or low.
3. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
the amount risked.
4. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day SMA or set a
hard stop of three times risk.
Let’s take a look at an actual news trade that we recommended for sub-
scribers to BKForex Advisor. On February 8, 2008, the Canadian employ-
ment report for the month of January was due for release at 7 a.m. New
York time. We believed that the number was going to be strong, because
the Canadian economy had been performing very well thanks to skyrock-
eting oil prices. The leading indicators of Canadian employment that we


--- PAGE 159 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
143
follow also suggested that the number was going to be very hot. The mar-
ket at the time was looking for employment to increase by only 11K after
having dropped by 18K the prior month. Therefore, our trade recommen-
dation was to go long Canadian dollars and short U.S. dollars (or short
USD/CAD) 20 minutes before the number was to be released at 7 a.m., as
indicated by Figure 9.28. Our entry price at the time was 1.0081. The high of
the range for the past few hours was 1.0085, so our stop should be placed
at 1.0095 (range high plus 10 pips), putting our risk at only 14 pips. Please
note that this risk is actually quite small, because usually the stop is be-
tween 25 and 30 pips away from the entry price. As soon as the trade was
initiated, we placed the target or limit on half on our position at 1.0067 (or
1.0081 minus 14 pips). To some people this may seem conservative, and it
is, but one of the cardinal rules that we follow at BKForex Advisor is to
never let a winner turn into a loser, which is why we always take proﬁts
quickly on half of our position and trail our stop on the remainder of the
position.
The Canadian employment report came out at 7 a.m., and it quadru-
pled expectations by increasing 46.4K. This led to an immediate sell-off in
USD/CAD. Our take proﬁt was hit instantaneously as the currency pair fell
from 1.0075 to 0.9983 (90 pips) in a matter of minutes. As soon as the ﬁrst
FIGURE 9.28
USD/CAD Proactive Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 160 ---
144
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
half of our position was closed, we moved our stop to breakeven on the
remainder of the position and trailed the stop by the 20-day SMA on the 5-
minute charts. The rest of the position was eventually exited at 0.9970 for
a total gain of 125 pips or an average gain of 62.5 pips.
The biggest problem with proactive trading, however, is the difﬁculty
of predicting economic data. BKForex subscribers beneﬁt from having
some of the work done for them with the weekly Event Risk Calendar,
but unless you have a strong background in economics or years of expe-
rience trading fundamentally, it is hard to ﬁgure out whether a piece of
data will increase or decrease from the prior month, let alone beat or miss
expectations.
That is why most people prefer to trade reactively. There is no need
to guess whether an economic release will be strong or weak, because the
whole idea behind reactive trading is to pull the trigger only after the eco-
nomic data report comes out and only if it is signiﬁcantly better or worse
than the market’s forecast. Most signal providers focusing on news trade
reactively. A good rule of thumb is to trade an economic data release only
if the surprise is greater than 100 percent of the market’s forecast.
For the Canadian employment report, for example, a reactive news
trader should short USD/CAD only if Canadian employment is greater than
22K or go long USD/CAD only if employment is negative (remember the
market is looking for an 11K rise). The bigger the deviation from the mar-
ket’s forecast, the better the trade.
Here are some general guidelines for reactive trading (use 5-minute
charts).
Strategy Rules for Reactive Trading
Long
1. Enter into a position 5 minutes after a major news report is released.
Rule #1 gives you a chance to make sure that there are no immediate
retracements. If a number is big, there will be more than 5 minutes
of follow-through.
2. Place a stop at the low of the news candle.
Rule #2 gives you a technically based logical stop. If the currency pair
manages to retrace back to the low of the candle when the news is
released, it indicates that the market doesn’t really believe in the
surprise.
3. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
the amount risked.
Rule #3 is to bank proﬁts when you have them and play only with the
house’s money on the second half of the position.


--- PAGE 161 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
145
4. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day SMA or set a
hard stop of three times risk.
Rule #4, using the 20-day SMA, allows you to capitalize on as much of
the move as possible.
Short
1. Enter into a position 5 minutes after a major news report is released.
2. Place a stop at the high of the news candle.
3. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
the amount risked.
4. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day SMA or set a
hard stop of three times risk.
Going back to the example of the Canadian employment report, a re-
active trader would enter the trade at 1.0015 with a stop at 1.0075 (which
is the high of the 5-minute news candle). As indicated in Figure 9.29,
USD/CAD consolidates for approximately two hours before ﬁnally break-
ing down and hitting the ﬁrst target of 0.9955 at 10:55 a.m. New York time.
The stop is then moved to breakeven on the second half of the position.
FIGURE 9.29
USD/CAD Reactive Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 162 ---
146
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
According to the trading rules, the stop is trailed by the 20-day SMA on the
5-minute charts and eventually closed at 0.9975 for a total proﬁt of 100 pips
or an average proﬁt of 50 pips on the trade.
Although reactive trading requires far less guesswork than proactive
trading, the stop tends to be much larger, which may be difﬁcult for some
traders to stomach. Also, the move or the ﬁrst target may not be reached
for hours. With proactive trading, by contrast, as long as the surprise is
fairly decent, the ﬁrst target is usually reached within the ﬁrst 5 minutes
of the release. Although the second half of the position may remain open
for a few hours, the stop is at breakeven, which means that there is no real
downside risk to the trade.
Since proactive and reactive trading both have their pitfalls, the best
way to trade is a combination of the two strategies. Although it may be dif-
ﬁcult to predict every piece of economic data, we may often have a view on
speciﬁc news releases. For example, if a country’s currency is very weak, it
may not be difﬁcult to make an educated guess that trade deﬁcits will nar-
row or trade surpluses will increase because a weak currency could help to
boost exports. The opposite would be true for a country with a strengthen-
ing currency. If the euro, for example, rose 500 pips in one month, there is
a decent chance that in the same month or the month after, the U.S. trade
deﬁcit will narrow. However, it may not be worthwhile to initiate our entire
position at one time if we do not feel strongly about the potential outcome
of the economic release, because doubling our position doubles our risk.
There are pieces of economic data that can be used to predict other eco-
nomic data, increasing the accuracy of the economic predictions; and if
they do not all line up, our conﬁdence levels would decrease. Therefore,
half of the position could be initiated ahead of number, and if the call is
correct, we could initiate the second half of the position after the release.
Even though we may be giving up potential proﬁts, if we are wrong, our
loss would be much less.
Here are the rules or guidelines that we use to trade proactively and
reactively.
Strategy Rules for Proactive and
Reactive Trading
Long
1. Enter into half of the position no more than 20 minutes before a major
news report will be released.
2. Place a stop 10 pips below the range low or 30 pips below your entry
price, whichever is smaller.
If the economic data is in line with the initial proactive trade:


--- PAGE 163 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
147
3. Enter the second half of the position 5 minutes after a major news
report is released.
4. Put a stop for the entire position at 45 pips below the second entry
price, and then trail by 20-day SMA.
5. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
45 pips.
6. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day SMA.
Short
1. Enter into half of the position no more than 20 minutes before a major
news report will be released.
2. Place a stop 10 pips above the range high or 30 pips above your entry
price, whichever is smaller.
If the economic data is in line with the initial proactive trade:
3. Enter the second half of the position 5 minutes after a major news
report is released.
4. Put a stop for the entire position at 45 pips below the second entry
price, and then trail by 20-day SMA.
5. Take your proﬁt on half of the position when it moves in your favor by
45 pips.
6. Trail stop on the remainder of the position by the 20-day SMA.
If the economic data is not in line with the initial trade, then do not
take a second position; instead, exit out of the ﬁrst position.
In the USD/CAD example, the ﬁrst half of the position would be initi-
ated at 1.0081 with a stop of 1.0095 (see Figure 9.30). After the economic
data report is released, the second half of the position should be initiated
at 1.0015 for a blended price of 1.0048. The stop of the entire position is
then lowered to 1.0060 or 45 pips away from the second entry price (this is
a rule that you can alter to your own trading style). Half of the position is
taken off when the trade moves in your favor by 45 pips, or hits 0.9970. The
remainder of the position is then exited when the price moves back above
the 20-day SMA or 0.9975. The total proﬁt on this trade is 151 pips, and the
average proﬁt on the trade is 75 pips.
Here are two more examples of combining proactive and reactive news
trading.
In the ﬁrst example, we are trading the U.K. retail sales numbers
on February 21, 2008. (See Figure 9.31.) The market believes that U.K.
retail sales will be strong and we agree, but we think that there is a de-
cent chance for an even greater surprise given the strength of the leading


--- PAGE 164 ---
148
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.30
USD/CAD Proactive and Reactive Combined Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 9.31
GBP/USD Proactive and Reactive Combined Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 165 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
149
indicators for U.K. retail sales that we typically follow. Therefore, we go
long the GBP/USD 20 minutes before the release at 1.9470. The stop on the
initial position is placed at 1.9450, or 10 pips below the range low. The U.K.
retail sales number comes out more than double the market’s forecast at
0.8 percent. The GBP/USD jumps 70 pips in the ﬁrst 5 minutes after the
release. We then enter the second half of the position at 1.9530 and move
the stop on the entire position to 1.9485 (1.9530 minus 40 pips). The tar-
get or limit on the initial position is placed at 1.9575, which is reached ap-
proximately 90 minutes later. We remain in the position until the GBP/USD
breaks the 20-day SMA on the 5-minute charts, which is at 1.9553. The total
proﬁt on this trade is 151 pips and the average proﬁt on the trade is 75 pips.
In the second example, we are trading the German trade balance on
April 8, 2008. The market believes that the German trade balance will de-
teriorate because of the strength of the euro, but we believed that it will
actually be strong since new orders and manufacturing production have
increased. Therefore, we go long the EUR/USD 20 minutes before the re-
lease at 1.5733. (See Figure 9.32.) The initial stop on the position is placed
10 pips below the range low of 1.5727, or 1.5717. The German trade balance
report comes out stronger than expected, and we enter into the second half
of the position at 1.5740 and move the stop on the entire position to 1.5700
(1.540 minus 40 pips). The target or limit on the initial position is placed
at 1.5785. Unfortunately, the EUR/USD does not make it to 1.5785, but we
end up exiting both lots of the position when the price breaks the 20-day
FIGURE 9.32
EUR/USD Proactive and Reactive Combined Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 166 ---
150
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
SMA at 1.5754, leaving the entire trade still proﬁtable. The total gain is 35
pips and the average proﬁt on the trade is 17.5 pips.
If any of our proactive trades were wrong, we would lose no more than
30 pips.
20–100 SHORT-TERM
MOMENTUM STRATEGY
Although many people like to trade off of 5-minute charts, there is a big
difference between trading news and using other short-term trading strate-
gies. News trading is not for the faint of heart, because many people may
ﬁnd it impossible to ﬁgure out a bias for economic data, while others may
ﬁnd it extremely difﬁcult to pull the trigger in reaction to a piece of news
when they see that a currency pair has already moved 50 to 60 pips in their
desired direction.
For those types of traders, it may be helpful to think about using other
types of strategies. The main reason short-term trading is often more popu-
lar than long-term trading is because many people do not have the patience
to wait days for a trade to develop. These are traders who need things to
happen immediately, cringe at every 10-pip move against them, and want
the trade to turn a proﬁt within the next few minutes or else they will aban-
don their position. They would be more than willing to take 10 pips 10 times
a day than to make 100 pips on one trade with the potential of watching the
position ﬁrst move 50 to 60 pips against them.
The best strategy for this type of trader is a short-term momentum
strategy. Although I prefer to trade news, one of my favorite strategies is
the 20–100 short-term momentum strategy. The strategy outlined here can
be used independently or as a method to achieve a better entry price for
longer-term strategies. The whole premise behind the strategy is that you
go long or short only when momentum is on your side. This is very impor-
tant because the goal is to hit your ﬁrst proﬁt target as soon as possible.
In this strategy, we use three different indicators: the 20-day exponen-
tial moving average (EMA), the 100-day simple moving average (SMA), and
the moving average convergence/divergence (MACD). The 20-day EMA is
the trigger for the trading strategy, and the main reason we use the EMA
instead of the SMA is because it places more weight on recent movements,
which is what we need for fast momentum trades. The 100-day SMA is used
to make sure that we take only trades that are in line with the broader
trend, while the MACD is used to help gauge momentum and to ﬁlter out
lower-probability signals. We use the default settings for the MACD his-
togram: ﬁrst EMA = 12, second EMA = 26, signal EMA = 9, all using closing


--- PAGE 167 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
151
prices. The trade is taken only when the MACD has turned within ﬁve can-
dles, because we want to enter into the trade when momentum is beginning
to build and not when it is maturing.
These are the rules or guidelines for the 20–100 short-term momentum
strategy.
Long Trade (Using 5-Minute Charts)
1. Find a currency pair that is trading below both the 20-day EMA and the
100-day SMA.
2. Wait for the price to cross above both moving averages by 15 pips, and
make sure that the MACD has turned positive no longer than 5 candles
ago.
3. Buy at market.
4. Place your stop at the low of the candle that broke the moving aver-
ages.
5. Sell half of the position when the currency pair has moved in your favor
by the amount risked, and move your stop on the remaining position
to breakeven.
6. Trail the stop on the remaining position by the 20-day EMA minus
15 pips.
Short Trade
1. Find a currency pair that is trading above both the 20-day EMA and the
100-day SMA.
2. Wait for the price to cross above both moving averages by 15 pips,
and make sure that the MACD has turned negative no longer than ﬁve
candles ago.
3. Sell at market.
4. Place your stop at the high of the candle that broke the moving aver-
ages.
5. Buy back half of the position when the currency pair has moved in
your favor by the amount risked, and move your stop on the remaining
position to breakeven.
6. Trail the stop on the rest of your position by the 20-day EMA plus 15
pips.
Here are some examples of the 20–100 short-term momentum strategy
in action:
The ﬁrst example that we will look at is a long trade.


--- PAGE 168 ---
152
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
On April 10, 2008, the EUR/USD broke above both the 20-day EMA and
the 100-day SMA after a long Asian session consolidation. Before taking
the trade, we checked that the MACD at the time had just turned positive,
and then we waited for the price to break above the moving averages by
15 pips to go long. (See Figure 9.33.) Since the moving average price cross
occurred at 1.5742, we entered the EUR/USD trade at 1.5757. The stop
would be placed at 1.5738, which is the low of the candle that broke above
the moving averages. The ﬁrst target is the entry price plus the amount
risked. Since we entered at 1.5757 and our stop is at 1.5738, the amount
risked is 19 pips. Therefore, the ﬁrst target would be 1.5757 plus 19 pips, or
1.5776. It is hit a few hours later, at which time we move our stop on the
rest of the position to breakeven. This is a money management rule that we
use most often at BKForex Advisor, because having the stop at breakeven
on the second half of the position means that we are trading with only our
proﬁts and are no longer vulnerable to losses. The position continues to
move in our favor. Even though there are times when the price falls below
the 20-day EMA, it never does so by more than 15 pips until 5:50 a.m. the
following morning. At that time, our trailing stop is hit and we exit the re-
mainder of the trade at 1.5804, which is the 20-day EMA minus 15 pips. The
total gain on this position if two lots were taken would be 67 pips or an
average gain of 33.5 pips.
The second example is a short trade in USD/JPY.
On April 11, 2008, USD/JPY broke below both the 20-day EMA and
the 100-day SMA at approximately 6:30 a.m. New York time. Before taking
the trade, we checked that the MACD at the time had just turned negative
and then we waited for the price to break below the moving averages by
FIGURE 9.33
EUR/USD 5-Minute Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 169 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
153
15 pips to go short. Since the moving average price cross occurred at
101.88, we entered the USD/JPY short trade at 101.88 minus 15 pips or
101.73. (See Figure 9.34.) The stop is placed at the high of the candle that
broke the moving average, or 102.01. The ﬁrst target is the entry price mi-
nus the amount risked. Since we entered into the short trade at 101.73 and
our stop is at 102.01, the amount risked would be 28 pips. This puts our ﬁrst
target at 101.45, or 101.73 minus 28 pips. The ﬁrst target is hit 10 minutes
later, making it the perfect short-term trade. As soon as that happens, the
stop is moved to breakeven on the remainder of the position. Then we con-
tinue to trail the stop until the price breaks back above the 20-day EMA by
15 pips. This occurs a few hours later at 10:45 a.m., when the second half
of the position is eventually closed at 101.06 for a total gain on the trade of
95 pips (assuming two lots) or an average gain of 47.5 pips.
The third example is a short trade in the GBP/USD.
On April 21, 2008, GBP/USD broke below both the 20-day EMA and the
100-day SMA at approximately 2:00 a.m. New York time. Before taking the
trade, we checked that the MACD at the time had just turned negative, and
then we waited for the price to break below the moving averages by 15
pips to go short. (See Figure 9.35.) Since the moving average price cross
occurred at 1.9992, we entered the GBP/USD short trade at 1.9992 minus
15 pips, or 1.9977. The stop is placed at the high of the candle that broke
the moving average, or 1.9999. The ﬁrst target is the entry price minus the
amount risked. Since we entered into the short trade at 1.9977 and our stop
is at 1.9999, the amount risked would be 22 pips. This puts our ﬁrst target
at 1.9955, or 1.9977 minus 22 pips. The ﬁrst target is hit two hours later.
FIGURE 9.34
USD/JPY 5-Minute Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 170 ---
154
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.35
GBP/USD 5-Minute Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
As soon as that happens, the stop is moved to breakeven on the remaining
position. Then we continue to trail the stop until the price breaks back
above the 20-day EMA by 15 pips. This occurs a few hours later at 7:20
a.m., when the second half of the position is eventually closed at 1.9855 for
a total gain on the trade of 144 pips (assuming two lots) or an average gain
of 72 pips.
The ﬁnal example is one where the trade gets stopped out.
On April 18, 2008, the AUD/USD broke above both the 20-day EMA and
the 100-day SMA after a long Asian session consolidation. Before taking
the trade, we checked that the MACD at the time had just turned posi-
tive within the past ﬁve bars, and then we waited for the price to break
above the moving averages by 15 pips to go long. Since the moving average
price cross occurred at 0.9368, we entered the AUD/USD trade at 0.9383.
(See Figure 9.36.) The stop would be placed at 0.9366, which is the low of
the candle that broke above the moving averages. The ﬁrst target is the en-
try price plus the amount risked. Since we entered at 0.9383 and our stop
is at 0.9366, the amount risked is 17 pips. Therefore, the ﬁrst target would
be 0.9383 plus 17 pips, or 0.9400. The currency pair takes hours to move
in our favor, but the rally does not have enough momentum to hit our ﬁrst
proﬁt target. It stops 2 pips shy before reversing sharply to stop us out for
a loss of 34 pips on the trade (assuming two lots) or an average loss of 17
pips. The only thing that could have given us a clue that the trade might not


--- PAGE 171 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
155
have much momentum could have been the fact that the MACD dip into
negative territory was very narrow and came off of a longer period above
positive territory. Either way, thankfully the stops on this type of strategy
tend to be small, making the loss bearable.
HIGH-PROBABILITY TURN STRATEGY
In the currency market, trends can last for a very long time. For some
people, this gives them many opportunities to join the trend, but for other
people who are contrarians by nature, the longer the trend lasts, the more
frustrating it becomes. Based on my years of interaction with individual
traders as well as the data from the FXCM Speculative Sentiment Index
(FXCM SSI), I have seen that even though most traders deny it, they are
top pickers or bottom ﬁshers by nature.
The FXCM Speculative Sentiment Index is based on the positioning
of the company’s most speculative clients. As indicated in Figure 9.37,
traders started to short the EUR/USD when it was trading at 1.28 and as
a group have remained net short from 1.28 all the way up to 1.56. There
are obviously traders who drop in and out of the survey because they were
FIGURE 9.36
AUD/USD 5-Minute Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 172 ---
156
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 9.37
FXCM SSI for the EUR/USD
(Source: FXCM)
stopped out, but the chart clearly indicates that short positions were in-
creased around 1.35 and 1.40. The FXCM SSI is published once a week on
DailyFX.com.
Picking a top or bottom can be extremely difﬁcult, and the FXCM SSI
proves that many traders do it unsuccessfully. This makes ﬁnding a good
way to time a turn extremely important. One of my favorite strategies is
to look for extension moves, and I deﬁne an extension move as consecu-
tive strength or weakness. There are many times that a currency pair will
rally for six, seven, or eight days straight with virtually no retracement. The
longer the move lasts, the more statistically signiﬁcant it becomes and the
higher the likelihood that the string of strength or weakness will come to
an end.
Based on looking at 10 years’ worth of data, I have found that rarely do
extension moves in the major currency pairs like the EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
and USD/JPY last longer than seven days.
Starting with the EUR/USD, we can see in Table 9.1 that over the past
10 years, the longest extension move that occurred in the currency lasted
for 10 days. The table is read in the following way: There have been 10 times
when the EUR/USD has moved in one direction for seven days straight,
with the move extending for an eighth day only ﬁve out of those 10 times.
Of those ﬁve times, only twice did the EUR/USD’s move last for a ninth
trading day, and only once did it then last for a tenth day. Therefore, once a
rally or sell-off has continued for seven days straight in the EUR/USD, the
odds for a turn within the next 24 hours increase exponentially, and those


--- PAGE 173 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
157
TABLE 9.1
Length of EUR/USD Extension
Moves (10 Years)
Number of Days
EUR/USD
1
1,292
2
595
3
273
4
125
5
64
6
35
7
10
8
5
9
2
10
1
11
0
12
0
13
0
14
0
15
0
odds become even more compounded if the move lasts for an eighth day.
This provides traders with a high-probability short-term trading opportu-
nity. Please bear in mind that this strategy does not usually predict major
turns, but occasionally the turn can become a meaningful one.
The next set of data is for the GBP/USD (see Table 9.2). Over the past
10 years, the longest extension move lasted for 12 days. As indicated by
the data, trends in the British pound have lasted longer than trends in the
euro. The longest move in the EUR/USD was 10 days. However, it is also
important to realize that rarely do the moves in the GBP/USD extend for
eight days; there have been only seven cases of this, which means that for
the GBP/USD an eight-day extension has approximately the same statisti-
cal signiﬁcance as a seven-day extension move in the EUR/USD.
The last table, Table 9.3, provides the same data for USD/JPY. The
longest move was nine days in length, and that happened only twice over
the past 10 years.
How Can You Use This Information?
I have devised some rules to help traders utilize this valuable information:
Rules for a Long Trade (Using Daily Charts)
1. Look for seven consecutive days of weakness, when the close of each
day is lower than the open.


--- PAGE 174 ---
158
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
TABLE 9.2
Length of GBP/USD Extension
Moves (10 Years)
Number of Days
GBP/USD
1
1,352
2
659
3
299
4
145
5
69
6
31
7
12
8
7
9
3
10
2
11
2
12
1
13
0
14
0
15
0
TABLE 9.3
Length of USD/JPY Extension
Moves (10 Years)
Number of Days
USD/JPY
1
1,334
2
652
3
323
4
159
5
66
6
33
7
12
8
7
9
2
10
0
11
0
12
0
13
0
14
0
15
0


--- PAGE 175 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
159
2. Buy at 5 p.m. New York time, which is when the next trading candle
begins.
3. Place a stop 30 pips below the entry price.
4. Close half of the position when it moves by two times the amount
risked. Move the stop on the remaining half to your initial entry.
5. Close the remaining position when the price has moved by four times
the amount risked, or 120 pips.
Rules for a Short Trade
1. Look for seven consecutive days of strength, when the close of each
day is higher than the open.
2. Sell at 5 p.m. New York time, which is when the next trading candle
begins.
3. Place a stop 30 pips above the entry price.
4. Close half of the position when it moves by two times the amount
risked. Move the stop on the remaining half to your initial entry.
5. Close the remaining position when the price has moved by four times
the amount risked, or 120 pips.
Here are some examples of how this strategy works.
The ﬁrst example is a long trade in USD/JPY. As indicated in
Figure 9.38, USD/JPY dropped for seven consecutive trading days. Based
on the USD/JPY table of extension moves, we see that only seven out of the
FIGURE 9.38
USD/JPY Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 176 ---
160
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
12 times that USD/JPY has moved in one direction for seven days straight
did the move extend for an eighth day. Given this information, there is a
high probability that USD/JPY would not sell off for an eighth consecu-
tive day. For that reason, we go long USD/JPY when the next day’s candle
begins at 5 p.m. New York time with a 30-pip money stop. The trade is exe-
cuted at 108.56 with a stop of 108.26 (108.56 minus 30 pips). The ﬁrst target
is simply two times the amount risked, or 60 pips, which places our limit or-
der to exit the ﬁrst half of our position at 108.56 plus 60 pips or 109.16. This
is reached the very next day, at which time we move our stop to breakeven,
or our initial entry price of 108.56. The target on the second lot is four times
the amount risked or 120 pips. Our entry price of 108.56 plus 120 pips is
109.76, and that, too, is hit 24 hours later, banking us a total proﬁt of 180
pips, or an average proﬁt of 90 pips per lot if two lots were traded.
The second example is a short trade in GBP/USD. As indicated in
Figure 9.39, GBP/USD rallied for seven consecutive trading days. Based on
the GBP/USD table of extension moves, we see that only seven out of the 12
times that GBP/USD has moved in one direction for seven days straight did
the move extend for an eighth day. Given this information, there is a decent
chance that the GBP/USD would not rally for an eighth consecutive day.
For that reason, we go short GBP/USD when the next day’s candle begins
at 5 p.m. New York time with a 30-pip money stop. The trade is executed at
FIGURE 9.39
GBP/USD Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 177 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
161
2.0083 with a stop of 2.0113 (2.0113 plus 30 pips). The ﬁrst target is simply
two times the amount risked, or 60 pips, which places our limit order to
exit the ﬁrst half of our position at 2.0083 minus 60 pips or 2.0023. This is
reached the very next day, at which time we move our stop to breakeven,
or to our initial entry price of 2.0083. The target on the second lot is four
times the amount risked, or 120 pips. Our entry price of 2.0083 minus 120
pips is 1.9963, and that is hit a few days later, banking us a total proﬁt of
180 pips, or an average proﬁt of 90 pips per lot if two lots were traded.
Does the Strategy Work for Other
Currency Pairs?
This strategy does work on other currency pairs, but it is important to re-
alize that each currency is different. Although seven days is signiﬁcant for
the EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and USD/JPY, eight days is more signiﬁcant for
currency pairs such as GBP/JPY, CHF/JPY, and GBP/CHF. Different cur-
rency pairs have different characteristics because some are more trending
than others.
The following is an example of fading an extension in a currency cross
such as EUR/JPY. As indicated in Figure 9.40, EUR/JPY rallied for seven
FIGURE 9.40
EUR/JPY Daily Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 178 ---
162
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
consecutive trading days. According to our strategy rules, we go short the
currency pair when the next day’s candle begins at 5 p.m. New York time
with a 30-pip money stop. The trade is executed at 164.54, with a stop of
164.84 (164.54 plus 30 pips). The ﬁrst target is simply two times the amount
risked, or 60 pips, which places our limit order to exit the ﬁrst half of our
position at 164.54 minus 60 pips or 163.94. This is reached the very next day,
at which time we move our stop to breakeven, or our initial entry price of
164.54. The target on the second lot is four times the amount risked or 120
pips. Our entry price of 164.54 minus 120 pips is 163.34, and that is hit 24
hours after that, banking us a total proﬁt of 180 pips, or an average proﬁt
of 90 pips per lot if two lots were traded.
Can the First Target Be Altered?
When examining this strategy, many people may realize that the ﬁrst tar-
get is relatively tight and easily reached. Traders are free to alter the ﬁrst
target to try to bank more pips, but please remember that the reason the
limit is placed at that level is because I like to focus on high-probability
trading strategies, and having the ﬁrst target easily achievable allows us
to bank proﬁts on the trade even if the turn that we are looking at is only
temporary. When designing trading strategies, I am a big believer that it is
important to start with a good foundation, meaning a strategy that works
on the most simplistic level, because it is hoped that any improvements or
alterations will only increase the strategy’s proﬁtability. Trying to improve
on a strategy that doesn’t work in the ﬁrst place becomes far more difﬁcult.
Could You Trade a Six-Day Move Instead?
Given the rarity of a seven-day extension move, some traders may won-
der whether they can trade a six-day extension move instead because the
chance of the move continuing for a seventh day is relatively small. Al-
though this can be done, it is not recommended. Traders need to be mindful
of the risks, because in all three of the major currencies, the move extended
for a seventh day at least 10 times within the past 10 years.
What Happens If the Move Continues for More
Than Seven Days?
One of the most common questions asked about this strategy is whether
the trade should be taken again if the move extends for more than seven
days. The answer is yes, because with each additional day that the move
continues, the greater the chance of a turn. Also, the risk on the strategy is
small enough to withstand a 10-day extension if both the ﬁrst and second


--- PAGE 179 ---
Technical Trading Strategies
163
targets are eventually achieved. The math works out well as long as the
extension does not continue for a twelfth day. Table 9.4 shows why.
According to Table 9.4, if we trade two lots and the seven-day fade
trade fails and the currency pair continues to move in the same direction
for an eighth day, we lose 60 pips on the trade. However, if we take the
trade again at the beginning of the ninth trading day and both target 1 and
target 2 are achieved, we bank 180 pips. The net return on the two trades
would be +120 pips.
If the move continues for the ninth day and we attempt to fade the
move at the beginning of the tenth trading day, we would be starting off
with two losing trades and a loss of −120 pips. If we are correct and the
move does stop on the tenth day, the third trade would bank 180 pips, net-
ting us a total of +60 pips on the three trades.
If we are so unlucky that the move continues for the tenth trading day
and we attempt to fade the move again at the beginning of the eleventh
trading day, we would be starting off with a loss of −180 pips on three
TABLE 9.4
Proﬁt and Loss for Extension Moves
Days
Lot 1
Lot 2
Pips P/L
8
−30
−30
−60
9
60
120
180
Total P/L
120
Days
Lot 1
Lot 2
Pips P/L
8
−30
−30
−60
9
−30
−30
−60
10
60
120
180
Total P/L
60
Days
Lot 1
Lot 2
Pips P/L
8
−30
−30
−60
9
−30
−30
−60
10
−30
−30
−60
11
60
120
180
Total P/L
0
Days
Lot 1
Lot 2
Pips P/L
8
−30
−30
−60
9
−30
−30
−60
10
−30
−30
−60
11
−30
−30
−60
12
60
120
180
Total P/L
−60


--- PAGE 180 ---
164
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
trades. However, if we are right on the fourth trade, at least we would
break even.
And on the rare occasion that the move extends for the eleventh trad-
ing day and we decide to attempt the trade again on the twelfth trading day,
we would be starting off with a loss of −240 pips on four trades. If we end
up being right on the fourth trade, we would reduce our loss to −60 pips.
A sequence of 12 consecutive trading days of strength is very rare; of the
three major currency pairs, a move has extended to the twelfth trading day
only once in the past 10 years, and that was in the GBP/USD.
The returns, of course, are not as good if the ﬁrst target or limit is hit
and the second lot is closed out at breakeven due to a retracement, because
the losses start to build if the currency pair’s move extends for a tenth trad-
ing day. If the move continues for an eighth trading day and you attempt
to fade it again on the ninth day, the best-case scenario based on the stops
and limits of this strategy is breakeven. If the move is exhausted on the
tenth day, the net loss on the trade would be 60 pips. This loss would grow
to 120 pips if the move continues for another day and so forth. Thankfully,
hitting just the ﬁrst target usually does not happen, because the second
target of 120 pips is relatively close and still easily achievable, especially
as the moves become more extended. When a turn happens, it tends to be
more than 100 to 150 pips.
Although the entry and exit rules for this strategy apply well for the
EUR/USD, GBP/USD, and USD/JPY, when it comes to some of the other
currency pairs, particularly the Japanese yen crosses, the entry and exit
rules may have to be altered, because the wild volatility in some of these
pairs may make a 30-pip stop-loss too tight.


--- PAGE 181 ---
C H A P T E R 10
Fundamental
Trading
Strategies
PICKING THE STRONGEST PAIRING
When trading currencies, many traders make the mistake of shaping opin-
ions around only one speciﬁc currency without taking into account the rel-
ative strength and weakness of both of the currencies in the pair that they
are trading. In the FX market, this neglect of foreign economic conditions
has the potential to greatly hinder the proﬁtability of a trade. It also in-
creases the odds of a loss. When trading against a strong economy, there
is more room for failure; the currency you want to trade could ﬂop badly,
leaving you stuck against a currency more likely to appreciate. Likewise,
there is an augmented chance that the other currency could strengthen,
resulting in a trade with negligible gains. Therefore, ﬁnding strong econ-
omy/weak economy pairings is a good strategy to use when attempting to
maximize returns.
Take for example March 22, 2005—the U.S. Federal Reserve upped
its risk for inﬂation in its Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) state-
ment, causing every major currency pair to tank against the dollar. Along
with this, a slew of positive U.S. economic data further reinforced the dol-
lar’s strength. While you probably could have gained on any long dollar
trade at that point, in some of the pairs the dollar appreciation had much
more staying power than in others. For example, after the initial blood-
bath, the pound did show a rebound in the weeks after the Fed’s meeting,
while the yen depreciated for a longer period of time. The reason is be-
cause at the time, Britain’s economy had been exhibiting a consistent, im-
pressive amount of economic growth, which, after the compulsive dollar
165


--- PAGE 182 ---
166
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
frenzy, helped it gain back some substantial ground within a matter of a
few weeks. The rebound in the British pound against the dollar can be seen
in Figure 10.1. After hitting a low of 1.8595 on March 28, the pair proceeded
to rebound back toward its pre-FOMC level of 1.9200 over the next three
weeks.
On the other hand, the Japanese yen saw a depreciation over a
much longer period of time with a continual upward movement in the
USD/JPY pair well into the middle of April. This price action can be seen in
Figure 10.2. After the FOMC meeting, the dollar proceeded to strengthen
another 300 pips over the next two weeks. Part of the reason for the
differences in these movements was that market watchers did not have
much faith in the Japanese economy, which had been teetering on the
edge of recession and showing no signs of positive economic expansion.
Therefore, the dollar strength had a much higher impact and an increased
amount of staying power with the struggling yen than with the consistently
strong pound.
Of course, interest rates as well as other geopolitical macro events
are also important, but when weighing two equally compelling trades,
ﬁnding the best strong economy and weak economy pairing can lead to
higher chances of success. Examining crosses of the majors during this
time period shows another way that knowledge of the strength of different
currency pairings can be used to increase proﬁtability. For example, take
a look at Figure 10.3 and Figure 10.4. Following the FOMC meeting on
FIGURE 10.1
GBP/USD Post Fed Meeting
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 183 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
167
FIGURE 10.2
USD/JPY Post Fed Meeting
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
FIGURE 10.3
AUD/JPY Post Fed Meeting
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 184 ---
168
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.4
EUR/JPY Post Fed Meeting
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
March 22, both AUD/JPY and EUR/JPY sold off, but AUD/JPY rebounded
much quicker than EUR/JPY. One of the reasons why this might have
occurred could very well be the strong economy/weak economy com-
parison. The Eurozone economy experienced very weak growth in 2003,
2004, and into 2005. Australia, on the other hand, performed much better
and throughout 2004 and the ﬁrst half of 2005 Australia offered one of the
highest interest rates of the industrialized world. As a result, as indicated
in Figure 10.3, the currency pair rebounded much quicker than EUR/JPY
post FOMC. This is why when looking for a trade, it is important to keep
strong economy/weak economy pairings in mind.
LEVERAGED CARRY TRADE
The leveraged carry trade strategy is one of the favorite trading strategies
of global macro hedge funds and investment banks. It is the quintessential
global macro trade. In a nutshell, the carry trade strategy entails going long
or buying a high-yielding currency and selling or shorting a low-yielding
currency. Aggressive speculators will leave the exchange rate exposure un-
hedged, which means that the speculator is betting that the high-yielding
currency is going to appreciate in addition to earning the interest rate dif-
ferential between the two currencies. For those who hedge the exchange
rate exposure, although interest rate differentials tend to be rather small,


--- PAGE 185 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
169
on the scale of 1 to 5 percent, if traders factor in 5 to 10 times leverage, the
proﬁts from interest rates alone can be substantial. Just think about it: A
2.5 percent interest rate differential becomes 25 percent on 10 times lever-
age. Leverage can also be very risky if not managed properly because it can
exacerbate losses. Capital appreciation generally occurs when a number of
traders see this same opportunity and also pile into the trade, which ends
up rallying the currency pair.
In foreign exchange trading, the carry trade is an easy way to take ad-
vantage of this basic economic principle that money is constantly ﬂow-
ing in and out of different markets, driven by the economic law of supply
and demand: markets that offer the highest returns on investment will in
general attract the most capital. Countries are no different—in the world
of international capital ﬂows, nations that offer the highest interest rates
will generally attract the most investment and create the most demand for
their currencies. A very popular trading strategy, the carry trade is simple
to master. If done correctly, it can earn a high return without an investor
taking on a lot of risk. However, carry trades do come with some risk. The
chances of loss are great if you do not understand how, why, and when
carry trades work best.
How Do Carry Trades Work?
The way a carry trade works is to buy a currency that offers a high interest
rate while selling a currency that offers a low interest rate. Carry trades are
proﬁtable because an investor is able to earn the difference in interest—or
spread—between the two currencies.
An example: Assume that the Australian dollar offers an interest rate
of 4.75 percent, while the Swiss franc offers an interest rate of 0.25 percent.
To execute the carry trade, an investor buys the Australian dollar and sells
the Swiss franc. In doing so, he or she can earn a proﬁt of 4.50 percent (4.75
percent in interest earned minus 0.25 percent in interest paid), as long as
the exchange rate between Australian dollars and Swiss francs does not
change. This return is based on zero leverage. Five times leverage equals a
22.5 percent return on just the interest rate differential. To illustrate, take a
look at the following example and Figure 10.5 to see how an investor would
actually execute the carry trade:
Executing the Carry Trade
Buy AUD and sell CHF (long AUD/CHF).
Long AUD position: investor earns 4.75 percent.
Short CHF position: investor pays 0.25 percent.
With spot rate held constant, proﬁt is 4.50 percent, or 450 basis points.


--- PAGE 186 ---
170
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.5
Leveraged Carry Trade Example
If the currency pair also increased in value due to other traders identi-
fying this opportunity, the carry trader would earn not only yield but also
capital appreciation.
To summarize: A carry trade works by buying a currency that offers a
high interest rate while selling a currency that offers a low interest rate.
Why Do Carry Trades Work?
Carry trades work because of the constant movement of capital into and
out of countries. Interest rates are a big reason why some countries attract
a great deal of investment as opposed to others. If a country’s economy
is doing well (high growth, high productivity, low unemployment, rising
incomes, etc.), it will be able to offer those who invest in the country a
higher return on investment. Another way to make this point is to say that
countries with better growth prospects can afford to pay a higher rate of
interest on the money that is invested in them.
Investors prefer to earn higher interest rates, so investors who are in-
terested in maximizing their proﬁts will naturally look for investments that
offer them the highest rate of return. When making a decision to invest in a
particular currency, an investor is more likely to choose the one that offers
the highest rate of return, or interest rate. If several investors make this
exact same decision, the country will experience an inﬂow of capital from
those seeking to earn a high rate of return.
What about countries that are not doing well economically? Countries
that have low growth and low productivity will not be able to offer in-
vestors a high rate of return on investment. In fact, there are some coun-
tries that have such weak economies that they are unable to offer any re-
turn on investment, meaning that interest rates are zero or very close to it.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
171
This difference between countries that offer high interest rates versus
countries that offer low interest rates is what makes carry trades possible.
Let’s take another look at the previous carry trade example, but in a
slightly more detailed way:
Imagine an investor in Switzerland who is earning an interest rate of
0.25 percent per year on her bank deposit of Swiss francs. At the same
time, a bank in Australia is offering 4.75 percent per year on a deposit
of Australian dollars. Seeing that interest rates are much higher with the
Australian bank, this investor would like to ﬁnd a way to earn this higher
rate of interest on her money.
Now imagine that the investor could somehow trade her deposit of
Swiss francs paying 0.25 percent for a deposit of Australian dollars paying
4.75 percent. What she has effectively done is to sell her Swiss franc deposit
and buy an Australian dollar deposit. After this transaction she now owns
an Australian dollar deposit that pays her 4.75 percent in interest per year,
4.50 percent more than she was earning with her Swiss franc deposit.
In essence, this investor has just done a carry trade by “buying” an
Australian dollar deposit, and “selling” a Swiss franc deposit.
The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capital
ﬂows out of Switzerland and into Australia as investors take their Swiss
francs and trade them in for Australian dollars. Australia is able to attract
more capital because of the higher rates it offers. This inﬂow of capital
increases the value of the currency (see Figure 10.6).
To summarize: Carry trades are made possible by the differences in
interest rates between countries. Because they prefer to earn higher in-
terest rates, investors will look to buy and hold high-interest-rate-paying
currencies.
When Do Carry Trades Work Best?
Carry trades work better during certain times than others. In fact, carry
trades are the most proﬁtable when investors as a group have a very spe-
ciﬁc attitude toward risk.
FIGURE 10.6
Eﬀects of a Carry Trade: AUD/CHF Carry Trade Example 1


--- PAGE 188 ---
172
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
How Much Risk Are You Willing to Take?
People’s moods tend
to change over time—sometimes they may feel more daring and willing
to take chances, while other times they may be more timid and prone to
being conservative. Investors, as a group, are no different. Sometimes they
are willing to make investments that involve a good amount of risk, while
other times they are more fearful of losses and look to invest in safer assets.
In ﬁnancial jargon, when investors as a whole are willing to take on
risk, we say that they have low risk aversion or, in other words, are in risk-
seeking mode. In contrast, when investors are drawn to more conservative
investments and are less willing to take on risk, we say that they have high
risk aversion.
Carry trades are the most proﬁtable when investors have low risk aver-
sion. This statement makes sense when you consider what a carry trade
involves. To recap, a carry trade involves buying a currency that pays a
high interest rate while selling a currency that pays a low interest rate. In
buying the high-interest-rate currency, the investor is taking a risk—there
is a good deal of uncertainty around whether the economy of the country
will continue to perform well and be able to pay high interest rates. Indeed,
there is a clear chance that something might happen to prevent the country
from paying this high interest rate. Ultimately, the investor must be willing
to take this chance.
If investors as a whole were not willing to take on this risk, then capital
would never move from one country to another, and the carry trade oppor-
tunity would not exist. Therefore, in order to work, carry trades require
that investors as a group have low risk aversion, or are willing to take the
risk of investing in the higher-interest-rate currency.
To summarize: Carry trades have the most proﬁt potential during
times when investors are willing to take the risk of investing in high-
interest-paying currencies.
When Will Carry Trades Not Work?
So far we have shown that a carry trade will work best when investors have
low risk aversion. What happens when investors have high risk aversion?
Carry trades are the least proﬁtable when investors have high risk aver-
sion. When investors have high risk aversion, they are less willing as a
group to take chances with their investments. Therefore, they would be
less willing to invest in riskier currencies that offer higher interest rates.
Instead, when investors have high risk aversion they would actually prefer
to put their money in “safe haven” currencies that pay lower interest rates.
This would be equivalent to doing the exact opposite of a carry trade—in
other words, investors are buying the currency with the low interest rate
and selling the currency with the high interest rate.


--- PAGE 189 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
173
Going back to our earlier example, assume the investor suddenly feels
uncomfortable holding a foreign currency, the Australian dollar. Now, in-
stead of looking for the higher interest rate, she is more interested in keep-
ing her investment safe. As a result, she swaps her Australian dollars for
more familiar Swiss francs.
The net effect of millions of people doing this transaction is that capi-
tal ﬂows out of Australia and into Switzerland as investors take their Aus-
tralian dollars and trade them in for Swiss francs. Because of this high in-
vestor risk aversion, Switzerland attracts more capital due to the safety
its currency offers despite the lower interest rates. This inﬂow of capital
increases the value of the Swiss franc (see Figure 10.7).
To summarize: Carry trades will be the least proﬁtable during times
when investors are unwilling to take the risk of investing in high-interest-
paying currencies.
Importance of Risk Aversion
Carry trades will generally be proﬁtable when investors have low risk
aversion, and unproﬁtable when investors have high risk aversion. There-
fore, before placing a carry trade it is critical to be aware of the
risk environment—whether investors as a whole have high or low risk
aversion—and when it changes.
Increasing risk aversion is generally beneﬁcial for low-interest-
rate-paying currencies: Sometimes the mood of investors will change
rapidly—investors’ willingness to make risky trades can change dramati-
cally from one moment to the next. Often these large shifts are caused by
signiﬁcant global events. When investor risk aversion does rise quickly, the
result is generally a large capital inﬂow into low-interest-rate-paying “safe
haven” currencies (see Figure 10.6).
For example, in the summer of 1998 the Japanese yen appreciated
against the dollar by over 20 percent in the span of two months, due mainly
FIGURE 10.7
Eﬀects of a Carry Trade When Investors Have High Risk Aversion:
AUD/CHF Carry Trade Example 2


--- PAGE 190 ---
174
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
to the Russian debt crisis and Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund
bailout. Similarly, just after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks the
Swiss franc rose by more than 7 percent against the dollar over a 10-day
period.
These sharp movements in currency values often occur when risk aver-
sion quickly changes from low to high. As a result, when risk aversion shifts
in this way, a carry trade can just as quickly turn from being proﬁtable to
unproﬁtable. Conversely, as investor risk aversion goes from high to low,
carry trades become more proﬁtable, as detailed in Figure 10.8.
How do you know if investors as a whole have high or low risk aver-
sion? Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to measure investor risk aversion with a
single number. One way to get a broad idea of risk aversion levels is to look
at the different yields that bonds pay. The wider the difference, or spread,
between bonds of different credit ratings, the higher the investor risk aver-
sion. Bond yields can be found in most ﬁnancial newspapers. In addition,
several large banks have developed their own measures of risk aversion
that signal when investors are willing to take risks and when they are not.
Other Things to Bear in Mind When Considering
a Carry Trade
While risk aversion is one of the most important things to consider before
making a carry trade, it is not the only one. The following are some addi-
tional issues to be aware of.
FIGURE 10.8
Risk Aversion and Carry Trade Proﬁtability


--- PAGE 191 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
175
Low-Interest-Rate Currency Appreciation
By entering into a carry
trade, an investor is able to earn a proﬁt from the interest rate difference, or
spread, between a high-interest-rate currency and a low-interest-rate cur-
rency. However, the carry trade can turn unproﬁtable if for some reason
(like the earlier risk aversion example) the low-interest-rate currency ap-
preciates by a large amount.
Aside from increases in investor risk aversion, improving economic
conditions within a low-interest-paying country can also cause its currency
to appreciate. An ideal carry trade involves a low-interest currency whose
economy is weak and has low expectations for growth. If the economy
were to improve, however, the country might then be able to offer in-
vestors a higher rate of return through increased interest rates. If this were
to occur—again using the earlier example, say that Switzerland increased
the interest rates it offered—then investors may take advantage of these
higher rates by investing in Swiss francs. As seen in Figure 10.7, an ap-
preciation of the Swiss franc would negatively affect the proﬁtability of the
Australian dollar–Swiss franc carry trade. (At the very least, higher interest
rates in Switzerland would negatively affect the carry trade’s proﬁtability
by lowering the interest rate spread.)
To give another example, this same sequence of events may cur-
rently be unfolding for the Japanese yen. Given its zero interest rates,
the Japanese yen has for a very long time been an ideal low-interest-rate
currency to use in carry trades (known as “yen carry trades”). This situa-
tion, however, may be changing. Increased optimism about the Japanese
economy has recently led to an increase in the Japanese stock market. In-
creased investor demand for Japanese stocks and currency has caused the
yen to appreciate, and this yen appreciation negatively affects the prof-
itability of carry trades like Australian dollar (high interest rate) versus
Japanese yen.
If investors continue to buy the yen, the “yen carry trade” will grow
more and more unproﬁtable. This further illustrates the fact that when the
low-interest-rate currency in a carry trade (the currency being sold) appre-
ciates, it negatively affects the proﬁtability of the carry trade.
Trade Balances
Country trade balances (the difference between im-
ports and exports) can also affect the proﬁtability of a carry trade. We
have shown that when investors have low risk aversion, capital will ﬂow
from the low-interest-rate-paying currency to the high-interest-rate-paying
currency (see Figure 10.6). This, however, does not always happen.
To understand why, think about the situation in the United States. The
United States currently pays historically low interest rates, yet it attracts
investment from other countries, even when investors have low risk aver-
sion (i.e., they should be investing in the high-interest-rate countries). Why


--- PAGE 192 ---
176
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
does this occur? The answer is because the United States runs a huge trade
deﬁcit (its imports are greater than its exports)—a deﬁcit that must be ﬁ-
nanced by other countries. Regardless of the interest rates it offers, the
United States attracts capital ﬂows to ﬁnance its trade deﬁcit.
The point of this example is to show that even when investors have
low risk aversion, large trade imbalances can cause a low-interest-rate cur-
rency to appreciate (as in Figure 10.7). And when the low-interest-rate cur-
rency in a carry trade (the currency being sold) appreciates, it negatively
affects the proﬁtability of the carry trade.
Time Horizon
In general, a carry trade is a long-term strategy. Before
entering into a carry trade, an investor should be willing to commit to a
time horizon of at least six months. This commitment helps to make sure
that the trade will not be affected by the “noise” of shorter-term currency
price movements. Also, not using excessive leverage for carry trades will
allow traders to hold onto their positions longer and to better weather mar-
ket ﬂuctuations by not getting stopped out.
To summarize: Carry trade investors should be aware of factors such
as currency appreciation, trade balances, and time horizon before placing
a trade. Any or all of these factors can cause a seemingly proﬁtable carry
trade to become unproﬁtable.
FUNDAMENTAL TRADING
STRATEGY: STAYING ON TOP OF
MACROECONOMIC EVENTS
Short-term traders seem to be focused only on the economic release of the
week and how it will impact their day trading activities. This works well
for many traders, but it is also important not to lose sight of the big macro
events that may be brewing in the economy—or the world for that matter.
The reason is because large-scale macroeconomic events will move mar-
kets and will move them big time. Their impact goes beyond a simple price
change for a day or two because depending on their size and scope, these
occurrences have the potential to reshape the fundamental perception to-
ward a currency for months or even years at a time. Events such as wars,
political uncertainty, natural disasters, and major international meetings
are so potent due to their irregularity that they have widespread psycho-
logical and physical impacts on the currency market. With these events
come both currencies that appreciate vastly and currencies that depreci-
ate just as dramatically. Therefore, keeping on top of global developments,
understanding the underlying direction of market sentiment before and af-
ter these events occur, and anticipating them could be very proﬁtable, or
at least can help prevent signiﬁcant losses.


--- PAGE 193 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
177
Know When Big Events Occur
r Signiﬁcant G-7 or G-8 ﬁnance ministers meetings.
r Presidential elections.
r Important summits.
r Major central bank meetings.
r Potential changes to currency regimes.
r Possible debt defaults by large countries.
r Possible wars as a result of rising geopolitical tensions.
r Federal Reserve chairman’s semiannual testimony to Congress on the
economy.
The best way to highlight the signiﬁcance of these events is through
examples.
G-7 Meeting, Dubai, September 2003
The countries that constitute the G-7 are the United States, United King-
dom, Japan, Canada, Italy, Germany, and France. Collectively, these coun-
tries account for two-thirds of the world’s total economic output. Not all
G-7 meetings are important. The only time the market really hones in on
the G-7 ﬁnance ministers meeting is when big changes are expected. The
G-7 ﬁnance ministers meeting on September 22, 2003, was a very important
turning point for the markets. The dollar collapsed signiﬁcantly following
the meeting at which the G-7 ﬁnance ministers wanted to see “more ﬂex-
ibility in exchange rates.” Despite the rather tame nature of these words,
the market interpreted this line to be a major shift in policy. The last time
changes to this degree had been made was back in 2000.
In 2000, the market paid particular attention to the upcoming meeting
because there was strong intervention in the EUR/USD the day before the
meeting. The meeting in September 2003 was also important because the
U.S. trade deﬁcit was ballooning and becoming a huge issue. The EUR/USD
bore the brunt of the dollar depreciation while Japan and China were inter-
vening aggressively in their currencies. As a result, it was widely expected
that the G-7 ﬁnance ministers as a whole would issue a statement that was
highly critical of Japan’s and China’s intervention policies. Leading up to
the meeting, the U.S. dollar had already begun to sell off, as indicated by
the chart in Figure 10.9. At the time of the announcement, the EUR/USD
shot up 150 pips. Though this initial move was not very substantial, be-
tween September 2003 and February 2004 (the next G-7 meeting), the dol-
lar fell 8 percent on a trade-weighted basis, 9 percent against the British
pound, 11 percent against the euro, 7 percent against the yen, and 1.5 per-
cent against the Canadian dollar. To put the percentages into perspective, a
move of 11 percent is equivalent to approximately 1,100 pips. Therefore the


--- PAGE 194 ---
178
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.9
EUR/USD Post G-7 Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
longer-term impact is much more signiﬁcant than the immediate impact, as
the event itself has the ability to change the overall sentiment in the mar-
ket. Figure 10.9 is a weekly chart of the EUR/USD that illustrates how the
currency pair performed following the September 22, 2003, G-7 meeting.
Political Uncertainty: 2004 U.S.
Presidential Election
Another example of a major event impacting the currency market is the
2004 U.S. presidential election. In general, political instability causes per-
ceived weakness in currencies. The hotly contested presidential election in
November 2004 combined with the differences in the candidates’ stances
on the growing budget deﬁcit resulted in overall dollar bearishness. The
sentiment was exacerbated even further given the lack of international
support for the incumbent president (George W. Bush) due to the admin-
istration’s decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein. As a result, in the three
weeks leading up to the election, the euro rose 600 pips against the U.S.
dollar. This can be seen in Figure 10.10. With a Bush victory becoming in-
creasingly clear and later conﬁrmed, the dollar sold off against the majors
as the market looked ahead to what would probably end up being the main-
tenance of the status quo. On the day following the election, the EUR/USD
rose another 200 pips and then continued to rise an additional 700 pips be-
fore peaking six weeks later. This entire move took place over the course


--- PAGE 195 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
179
FIGURE 10.10
EUR/USD U.S. Election
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
of two months, which may seem like eternity to many, but this macroeco-
nomic event really shaped the markets; for those who were following it, big
proﬁts could have been made. However, this is important even for short-
term traders because given that the market was bearish dollars in general
leading up to the U.S. presidential election, a more prudent trade would
have been to look for opportunities to buy the EUR/USD on dips rather
than trying to sell rallies and look for tops.
Wars: U.S. War in Iraq
Geopolitical risks such as wars can also have a pronounced impact on the
currency market. Figure 10.11 shows that between December 2002 and
February 2003, the dollar depreciated 9 percent against the Swiss franc
(USD/CHF) in the months leading up to the invasion of Iraq. The dollar
sold off because the war itself was incredibly unpopular among the inter-
national community. The Swiss franc was one of the primary beneﬁciaries
due to the country’s political neutrality and safe haven status. Between
February and March, the market began to believe that the inevitable war
would turn into a quick and decisive U.S. victory, so they began to unwind
the war trade. This eventually led to a 3 percent rally in USD/CHF as in-
vestors exited their short dollar positions.
Each of these events caused large-scale movement in the currency
markets, which makes them important events to follow for all types of


--- PAGE 196 ---
180
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.11
USD/CHF War Trade
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
traders. Keeping abreast of broad macroeconomic events can help traders
make smarter decisions and prevent them from fading large uncertainties
that may be brewing in the background. Most of these events are talked
about, debated, and anticipated many months in advance by economists,
currency analysts, and the international community in general. The world
changes and currency traders need to be prepared for that.
COMMODITY PRICES AS A LEADING
INDICATOR
Commodities, namely gold and oil, have a substantial connection to the
FX market. Therefore, understanding the nature of the relationship be-
tween them and currencies can help traders gauge risk, forecast price
changes, as well as understand exposure. Even if commodities seem like
a wholly alien concept, gold and oil especially tend to move based on
similar fundamental factors that affect currency markets. As we have pre-
viously discussed, there are four major currencies considered to be com-
modity currencies—the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the New
Zealand dollar, and the Swiss franc. The AUD, CAD, NZD, and CHF all have
solid correlations with gold prices; natural gold reserves and currency laws
in these countries result in almost mirror-like movements. The CAD also
tends to move somewhat in line with oil prices; however, the connection
here is much more complicated and ﬁckle. Each currency has a speciﬁc


--- PAGE 197 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
181
correlation and reason as to why its actions reﬂect commodity prices so
well. Knowledge of the fundamentals behind these movements, their direc-
tion, and the strength of the parallel could be an effective way to discover
trends in both markets.
The Relationship
Gold
Before analyzing the relationship gold has with the commodity cur-
rencies, it is important to ﬁrst understand the connection between gold and
the U.S. dollar. Although the United States is the world’s second largest
producer of gold (behind South Africa), a rally in gold prices does not pro-
duce an appreciation of the dollar. Actually, when the dollar goes down,
gold tends to go up, and vice versa. This seemingly illogical occurrence is a
by-product of the perception investors hold of gold. During unstable geopo-
litical times, traders tend to shy away from the dollar and instead turn to
gold as a safe haven for their investments. In fact, many traders call gold
the “antidollar.” Therefore, if the dollar depreciates, gold gets pushed up as
wary investors ﬂock from the declining greenback to the steady commod-
ity. The AUD/USD, NZD/USD, and USD/CHF currency pairs tend to mirror
gold’s movements the closest because these other currencies all have sig-
niﬁcant natural and political connections to the metal.
Starting in the South Paciﬁc, the AUD/USD has a very strong positive
correlation (0.80) with gold as shown in Figure 10.12; therefore, whenever
gold prices go up, the AUD/USD also tends to go up as the Australian dollar
appreciates against the U.S. dollar. The reason for this relationship is that
Australia is the world’s third largest producer of gold, exporting about $5
billion worth of the precious metal annually. Because of this, the currency
pair ampliﬁes the effects of gold prices twofold. If instability is causing an
increase in prices, this probably signals that the USD has already begun
to depreciate. The pairing will then be pushed down further as importers
of gold demand more of Australia’s currency to cover higher costs. The
New Zealand dollar tends to follow the same path in the AUD/USD pair-
ing because New Zealand’s economy is very closely linked to Australia’s.
The correlation in this pairing is also approximately 0.80 with gold (see
Figure 10.13 for the chart). The CAD/USD has an even stronger correlation
with gold prices at 0.84, caused in large part by analogous reasons to the
AUD’s connection; Canada is the ﬁfth largest exporter of gold.
In Europe, Switzerland’s currency has a strong relationship with gold
prices as well. However, the CHF/USD pairing’s 0.88 correlation with the
metal is caused by different reasons than the NZD’s, AUD’s, and CAD’s
connections. Switzerland does not have substantial natural gold reserves
like Australia or Canada and therefore it is not a notable exporter of the
metal. However, the Swiss franc is one of the few major currencies that
still adheres to the gold standard. A full 25 percent of Switzerland’s bank


--- PAGE 198 ---
182
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
AUD/USD
AUD/USD vs. Price of Gold 2002–2008
0.5
400
600
Price of Gold
800
1000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Price of Gold (rhs)
AUD/USD (lhs)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9 
FIGURE 10.12
AUD/USD and Gold
issue notes are backed in gold reserves. This solid currency base makes
it no mystery as to why the CHF is perceived as a currency safe haven
in unstable times. During times of geopolitical uncertainties, the Swissie
tends to rally. An example of this could be found in the U.S. buildup to the
war in Iraq. Many investors drew their money out of the USD and invested
heavily in both gold and the CHF.
Thus, a trader who notes a rising trend in gold prices (or in other met-
als such as copper or nickel) might be wise to go long any one of the
four commodity currencies instead. One interesting incentive to go long
the AUD/USD instead of gold is the unique ability of expressing the same
view but also being able to earn positive carry. Gold is also usually a solid
indicator of the overall picture in the metals markets.
Oil
Oil prices have a huge impact on the world economy, affecting
both consumers and producers. Therefore the correlation between this


--- PAGE 199 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
183
NZD/USD
NZD/USD vs. Price of Gold 2002–2008
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
400
600
Price of Gold
800
1000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Price of Gold (rhs)
NZD/USD (lhs)
FIGURE 10.13
NZD/USD and Gold
commodity and currency prices is much more complex and less stable than
that of gold. In fact, out of all of the commodity currencies, only one (the
CAD) has any semblance of a connection with oil prices.
The USD/CAD has a correlation of –0.4, a fairly weak number indicat-
ing that a rally in oil prices will result in a rally in the Canadian dollar only
some of the time. Throughout the second half of 2004 and ﬁrst half of 2005,
this correlation has been much stronger. Although Canada is the world’s
fourteenth largest producer of oil, oil’s effect on its economy is much more
all-encompassing than gold’s. While gold prices do not have a substantial
spillover into other areas, oil prices most deﬁnitely do. Canada especially
has trouble due to its cold climate, which creates a large amount of demand
for heating oil most of the year. Moreover, Canada is particularly suscepti-
ble to poor foreign economic conditions because it depends heavily on ex-
ports. Therefore, oil has a very mixed effect on the Canadian dollar. Most
of this is dependent upon how U.S. consumer demand responds to rising


--- PAGE 200 ---
184
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
oil prices. Canada’s economy is closely tied to its southern neighbor since
85 percent of its exports are destined for the United States.
Trading Opportunity
Now that the relationships have been explained, there are two ways to ex-
ploit this knowledge. Taking a look at Figures 10.12, 10.13, and 10.14, you
can see that generally speaking, commodity prices are a leading indicator
for currency prices. This is most apparent in the NZD/USD–gold relation-
ship shown in Figure 10.13 and the CAD/USD–oil relationship shown in
Figure 10.14. As such, commodity block traders can monitor gold and oil
prices to forecast movements in the currency pairs. The second way to ex-
ploit this knowledge is to parlay the same view using different products,
which does help to diversify risk a bit even with the high correlation. In
fact, there is one key advantage to expressing the view in currencies over
commodities, and that is that it offers traders the ability to earn interest
Inverse of USD/CAD
Inverse of USD/CAD vs. Price of Oil 2002–2008
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
20
40
60
80
100
120
Price of Oil
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Price of Oil (rhs)
Inverse of USD/CAD (lhs)
FIGURE 10.14
CAD/USD and Oil


--- PAGE 201 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
185
on their positions based on the interest rate differential between the two
countries, while gold and oil futures positions do not.
USING BOND SPREADS AS A LEADING
INDICATOR FOR FX
Any trader can attest that interest rates are an integral part of investment
decisions and can drive markets in either direction. FOMC rate decisions
are the second largest currency-market-moving release, behind unemploy-
ment data. The effects of interest rate changes have not only short-term
implications, but also long-term consequences on the currency markets.
One central bank’s rate decision can affect more than a single pairing in
the interrelated forex market. Yield differentials ﬁxed income instruments
such as London Interbank Offered Rates (LIBOR) and 10-year bond yields
can be used as leading indicators for currency movements. In FX trading,
an interest rate differential is the difference between the interest rate on
a base currency (appearing ﬁrst in the pair) less the interest rate on the
quoted currency (appearing second in the pair). Each day at 5:00 p.m. EST,
the close of the day for currency markets, funds are either paid out or
received to adjust for interest rate differences. Understanding the corre-
lation between interest rate differentials and currency pairs can be very
proﬁtable. In addition to central bank overnight rate decisions, expected
future overnight rates along with the expected timing of rate changes are
also critical to currency pair movements. The reason why this works is that
the majority of international investors are yield seekers. Large investment
banks, hedge funds, and institutional investors have the ability capital-wise
to access global markets. Therefore, they are actively shifting funds from
lower-yielding assets to higher-yielding assets.
Interest Rate Differentials: Leading Indicator,
Coincident Indicator, or Lagging Indicator?
Since most currency traders consider present and future interest rate
differentials when making investment decisions, there should theoretically
be some correlation between yield differences and currency pair prices.
However, do currency pair prices predict rate decisions, or do rate de-
cisions affect currency pair prices? Leading indicators are economic
indicators that predict future events; coincident indicators are eco-
nomic indicators that vary with economic events; lagging indicators are
economic indicators that follow an economic event. For instance, if inter-
est rate differentials predict future currency pair prices, interest rate dif-
ferentials are said to be leading indicators of currency pair prices. Whether


--- PAGE 202 ---
186
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
interest rate differentials are a leading, coincident, or lagging indicator of
currency pair prices depends on how much traders care about future rates
versus current rates. Assuming efﬁcient markets, if currency traders care
only about current interest rates and not about future rates, one would
expect a coincident relationship. If currency traders consider both current
and future rates, one would expect interest rate differentials to be a leading
indicator of future currency prices.
The rule of thumb is that when the yield spread increases in favor of a
certain currency that currency will generally appreciate against other cur-
rencies. For example, if the current Australian 10-year government bond
yield is 5.50 percent and the current U.S. 10-year government bond yield
is 2.00 percent, then the yield spread would be 350 basis points in favor of
Australia. If Australia raised its interest rates by 25 basis points and the 10-
year government bond yield appreciated to 5.75 percent, then the new yield
spread would be 375 basis points in favor of Australia. Based on historical
evidence, the Australian dollar is also expected to appreciate against the
U.S. dollar in this scenario.
Based on a study of three years of empirical data starting from January
2002 and ending January 2005, we ﬁnd that interest rate differentials tend
to be a leading indicator of currency pairs. Figures 10.15, 10.16, and 10.17
are graphical representations of this ﬁnding.
1.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
AUD/USD
Int. Rate Differential
AUD/USD vs. Interest Rate Differential
0.80
0.75
0.70
1/2/2004
5/21/2004
10/8/2004
2/25/2005
7/15/2005
12/2/2005
4/21/2006
9/8/2006
1/26/2007
6/15/2007
11/2/2007
3/21/2008
0.65
0.60
Bond Spread
AUD/USD
Date
FIGURE 10.15
AUD/USD and Bond Spread


--- PAGE 203 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
187
GBP/USD vs. Interest Rate Differential
Date
GBP/USD
Bond Spread
GBP/USD
Int. Rate Differential
1/2/2004
2.08
1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
–0.20
–0.40
–0.60
–0.80
2.05
2.02
1.99
1.96
1.93
1.90
1.87
1.84
1.81
1.78
1.75
1.72
1.69
1.66
1.63
1.60
5/21/2004
10/8/2004
2/25/2005
7/15/2005
12/2/2005
4/21/2006
9/8/2006
1/26/2007
6/15/2007
11/2/2007
3/21/2008
FIGURE 10.16
GBP/USD and Bond Spread
USD/CAD vs Interest Rate Differential
Date
USD/CAD
Bond Spread
1.40
1.35
1.30
1.25
1.20
USD/CAD
Int. Rate Differential
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
1/2/2004
5/21/2004
10/8/2004
2/25/2005
7/15/2005
12/2/2005
4/21/2006
9/8/2006
1/26/2007
6/15/2007
11/2/2007
3/21/2008
1.45
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
–0.20
–0.40
–0.60
–0.80
–1.00
FIGURE 10.17
USD/CAD and Bond Spread


--- PAGE 204 ---
188
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
These ﬁgures show three examples of currency pairs where bond
spreads have the clearest leading-edge correlation. As one would expect
from the fact that traders trade on a variety of information and not just in-
terest rates, the correlation, though good, is not perfect. In general, interest
rate differential analysis seems to work better over a longer period of time.
However, shifts in sentiment for the outlook for the path of interest rates
over the shorter term can still be a leading indicator for currency prices.
Calculating Interest Rate Differentials and
Following the Currency Pair Trends
The best way to use interest rate differentials for trading is by keeping
track of one-month LIBOR rates or 10-year bond yields in Microsoft Excel.
These rates are publicly available on web sites such as Bloomberg.com.
Interest rate differentials are then calculated by subtracting the yield of
the second currency in the pair from the yield of the ﬁrst. It is important
to make sure that interest rate differentials are calculated in the order in
which they appear for the pair. For instance, the interest rate differentials
in GBP/USD should be the 10-year gilt rate minus the 10-year U.S. Treasury
note rate. For euro data, use data from the German 10-year bond. Form a
table that looks similar to the one shown in Table 10.1.
After sufﬁcient data is gathered, you can graph currency pair values
and yields using a graph with two axes to see any correlations or trends.
The sample graphs in Figures 10.15, 10.16, and 10.17 use the date in the
x-axis and currency pair price and interest rate differentials on two y-axis
graphs. To fully utilize this data in trading, you want to pay close attention
to trends in the interest rate differentials of the currency pairs you trade.
TABLE 10.1
Bond Spreads
Date
1/1/2004 1/1/2005 1/1/2006 1/1/2007 5/1/2008
U.S. 10-year yield
4.38
4.27
4.39
4.70
3.86
GBP/USD
1.7705
1.9234
1.7706
1.9262
1.9708
U.K. 10-year yield
4.86
4.54
4.10
4.80
4.74
U.K.–U.S. rate diﬀerential
−0.48
−0.27
0.29
−0.10
−0.89
USD–JPY
107.41
102.52
114.38
118.6
105.37
JPY 10-year yield
1.37
1.41
1.48
1.69
1.65
U.S.–JPY rate diﬀerential
3.01
2.86
2.91
3.02
2.21


--- PAGE 205 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
189
FUNDAMENTAL TRADING STRATEGY:
RISK REVERSALS
Risk reversals are a useful fundamentals-based tool to add to your mix
of indicators for trading. One of the weaknesses of currency trading is
the lack of volume data and accurate indicators for gauging sentiment.
The only publicly available report on positioning is the “Commitments of
Traders” report published by the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-
sion, and even that is released with a three-day delay. A useful alterna-
tive is to use risk reversals, which are provided on a real-time basis on
the Forex Capital Markets (FXCM) news plug-in, under Options. As we
ﬁrst introduced in Chapter 8, a risk reversal consists of a pair of options
for the same currency (a call and a put). Based on put/call parity, far out-
of-the-money options (25 delta) with the same expiration and strike price
should also have the same implied volatility. However, in reality this is
not true. Sentiment is embedded in volatilities, which makes risk rever-
sals a good tool to gauge market sentiment. A number strongly in favor
of calls over puts indicates that there is more demand for calls than puts.
The opposite is also true: a number strongly in favor of puts over calls
indicates that there is a premium built in put options as a result of the
higher demand. If risk reversals are near zero, this indicates that there is
indecision among bulls and bears and that there is no strong bias in the
markets.
What Does a Risk Reversal Table Look Like?
We showed a risk reversal table before in Chapter 8, (Table 8.3), but want
to describe it again to make sure that it is well understood. Each of the ab-
breviations for the currency options are listed, and, as indicated, most risk
reversals are near zero, which indicates no signiﬁcant bias. For USD/JPY,
though, the longer-term risk reversals indicate that the market is strongly
favoring yen calls (JC) and dollar puts.
How Can You Use This Information?
For easier graphing and tracking purposes, we use positive and negative
integers for call and put premiums, respectively, in Figure 10.18. Therefore
a positive number indicates that calls are preferred over puts and that the
market as a whole is expecting an upward movement in the underlying cur-
rency. Likewise, a negative number indicates that puts are preferred over
calls and that the market is expecting a downward move in the underlying
currency. Used prudently, risk reversals can be a valuable tool in judging


--- PAGE 206 ---
190
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.18
EUR/USD and Risk Reversal Chart
market positioning. While the signals generated by a risk reversal system
will not be completely accurate, they can specify when the market is bullish
or bearish.
Risk reversals become quite important when the values are at extreme
levels. We identify extreme levels as one standard deviation plus or mi-
nus the average risk reversal. When risk reversals are at these levels, they
give off contrarian signals, indicating that a currency pair is overbought
or oversold based on sentiment. The indicator is perceived as a contrarian
signal because when the entire market is positioned for a rise in a given
currency, it makes it that much harder for the currency to rally, and that
much easier for it to fall on negative news or events. As a result, a strongly
negative number implies oversold conditions, whereas a strongly positive
number would imply overbought conditions. Although the buy or sell sig-
nals produced by risk reversals are not perfect, they can convey additional
information used to make trading decisions.
Examples
Our ﬁrst example of the EUR/USD is shown in Figure 10.18. Visually
you can see that 25-delta risk reversals have been a leading indicator for
EUR/USD price action. When risk reversals plunged to –1.39 on September
30, it was a signal that the market had a strong bearish bias. This proved
to be a reliable contrarian indicator of what eventually became a 300-pip


--- PAGE 207 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
191
rebound in the EUR/USD over the course of nine days. When prices spiked
once again almost immediately to 0.67 in favor of a continuation of the up
move, the EUR/USD proved bulls wrong by engaging in an even deeper sell-
off. Although there were many instances of risk reversals signaling contra-
trend moves on a smaller scale, the next major spike came a year later. On
August 16, risk reversals were at 1.43, which meant that bullish sentiment
hit a very high level. This preceded a 260-pip drop in the EUR/USD over
the course of three weeks. When risk reversals spiked once again a month
later to 1.90, we saw another top in the EUR/USD, which later became a
much deeper descent.
The next example is the GBP/USD. As can be seen in Figure 10.19, risk
reversals do a very good job of identifying extreme overbought and over-
sold conditions. Buy and sell levels are added to the GBP/USD chart for
further clariﬁcation of how risk reversals can also be used to time market
turns. With the lack of price and volume data to give us a sense of where
the market is positioned, risk reversals can be helpful in gauging general
market sentiment.
USING OPTION VOLATILITIES TO TIME
MARKET MOVEMENTS
Using option volatilities to time foreign exchange spot movements is a
topic that we touched upon brieﬂy in Chapter 8. Since this is a very use-
ful strategy that is a favorite among professional hedge funds, it certainly
FIGURE 10.19
GBP/USD Risk Reversal Chart


--- PAGE 208 ---
192
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
warrants a more detailed explanation. Implied volatility can be deﬁned as
a measure of a currency’s expected ﬂuctuation over a given time period
based on past price ﬂuctuations. This is typically calculated by taking the
historic annual standard deviation of daily price changes. Future prices
help to determine implied volatility, which is used to calculate option pre-
miums. Although this sounds fairly complicated, its application is not. Ba-
sically, option volatilities measure the rate and magnitude of a currency’s
price over a given period of time based on historical ﬂuctuations. There-
fore, if the average daily trading range of the EUR/USD contracted from 100
pips to 60 pips and stayed there for two weeks, in all likelihood short-term
volatility also contracted signiﬁcantly compared to longer-term volatility
during the same time period.
Rules
As a guideline, there are two simple rules to follow. The ﬁrst one is that if
short-term option volatilities are signiﬁcantly lower than long-term volatil-
ities, one should expect a breakout, though the direction of the breakout is
not deﬁned by this rule. Second, if short-term option volatilities are signif-
icantly higher than long-term volatilities, one should expect a reversion to
trading range.
Why Do These Rules Work?
During a ranging period, implied option volatilities are either low or on
the decline. The inspiration for these rules is that in periods of range trad-
ing, there tends to be little movement. We care most about when option
volatilities drop sharply, which could be a sign that a proﬁtable breakout
is under way. When short-term volatility is above long-term volatility, it
means that near-term price action is more volatile than the long-term av-
erage price action. This suggests that the ranges will eventually contract
back toward average levels. The trend is most noticeable in empirical data.
Here are a few examples of when this rule accurately predicted trends or
breaks.
Before analyzing the charts, it is important to note that we use one-
month volatilities as our short-term volatilities and three-month volatilities
as our longer-term volatilities.
In the AUD/CAD volatility chart in Figure 10.20, for the most part
shorter-term volatility is fairly close to the longer-term volatility. However,
the ﬁrst arrow shows an instance where short-term volatility spiked well
below long-term volatility, which, as indicated by our rule, suggests an up-
coming breakout scenario in the currency pair. AUD/CAD did eventually
break upward signiﬁcantly into a strong uptrend.


--- PAGE 209 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
193
FIGURE 10.20
AUD/CAD Volatility Chart
The same trend is visible in the USD/JPY volatility chart in Figure 10.21.
The leftmost arrow shows an instance where one-month implied volatil-
ity spiked signiﬁcantly higher than three-month volatility; as expected, the
spot price continued to range. The next downward arrow points to an
area where short-term volatility fell below long-term volatility, leading to a
breakout that sent spot prices up.
FIGURE 10.21
USD/JPY Volatility Chart


--- PAGE 210 ---
194
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Who Can Beneﬁt from These Rules?
This strategy is not only useful for breakout traders, but range traders can
also utilize this information to predict a potential breakout scenario. If
volatility contracts fall signiﬁcantly or become very low, the likelihood of
continued range trading decreases. After eyeing a historical range, traders
should look at volatilities to estimate the likelihood that the spot will re-
main within this range. Should the trader decide to go long or short this
range, he or she should continue to monitor volatility as long as he or she
has an open position in the pair to assist them in determining when to close
out that position. If short-term volatilities fall well below long-term volatili-
ties, the trader should consider closing the position if the suspected break-
out is not in the trader’s favor. The potential break is likely to work in the
favor of the trader if the current spot is close to the limit and far from the
stop. In this hypothetical situation, it may be proﬁtable to move limit prices
away from current spot prices to increase proﬁts from the potential break.
If the spot price is close to the stop price and far from the limit price, the
break is likely to work against the trader, and the trader should close the
position immediately.
Breakout traders can monitor volatilities to verify a breakout. If a
trader suspects a breakout, he or she can verify this breakout through im-
plied volatilities. Should implied volatility be constant or rising, there is a
higher probability that the currency will continue to trade in range than if
volatility is low or falling. In other words, breakout traders should look for
short-term volatilities to be signiﬁcantly lower than long-term volatilities
before making a breakout trade.
Aside from being a key component for pricing, option volatilities can
also be a useful tool for forecasting market activities. Option volatilities
measure the rate and magnitude of the changes in a currency’s prices. Im-
plied option volatilities, on the other hand, measure the expected ﬂuctua-
tion of a currency’s price over a given period of time based on historical
ﬂuctuations.
Tracking Volatilities on Your Own
Volatility tracking typically involves taking the historic annual stan-
dard deviation of daily price changes. Volatilities can be obtained from
the FXCM news plug-in available at www.fxcm.com/forex-news-software-
exchange.jsp. Generally speaking, we use three-month volatilities for long-
term volatilities numbers and one-month volatilities for the short term.
Figure 10.22 shows how the volatilities would look on the news plug-in.
The next step is to start compiling a list of data for date, currency
pair price, implied one-month volatility, and implied three-month volatility


--- PAGE 211 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
195
FIGURE 10.22
IFR Volatility Data
for the currency pairs you care about. The best way to generate this list
is through a spreadsheet program such as Microsoft Excel, which makes
graphing trends much easier. It might also be beneﬁcial to ﬁnd the differ-
ence between the one-month and three-month volatilities to look for large
differentials or to calculate one-month volatility as a percentage of three-
month volatility.
Once a sufﬁcient amount of data is compiled, one can graph the data as
a visual aid. The graph should use two y-axes with spot prices on one, and
short- and long-term volatilities on the other. If desired, the differences in
short- and long-term volatilities can be graphed as well in a separate, single
y-axis graph.
FUNDAMENTAL TRADING
STRATEGY: INTERVENTION
Intervention by central banks is one of the most important short-term and
long-term fundamentally based market movers in the currency market. For
short-term traders, intervention can lead to sharp intraday movements on
the scale of 150 to 250 pips in a matter of minutes. For longer-term traders,
intervention can signal a signiﬁcant change in trend because it suggests
that the central bank is shifting or solidifying its stance and sending a
message to the market that it is putting its backing behind a certain di-
rectional move in its currency. There are basically two types of interven-
tion, sterilized and unsterilized. Sterilized intervention requires offsetting


--- PAGE 212 ---
196
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
intervention with the buying or selling of government bonds, while unster-
ilized intervention involves no changes to the monetary base to offset inter-
vention. Many argue that unsterilized intervention has a more lasting effect
on the currency than sterilized intervention.
Taking a look at some of the following case studies, it is apparent that
interventions in general are important to watch and can have large impacts
on a currency pair’s price action. Although the actual timing of intervention
tends to be a surprise, quite often the market will begin talking about the
need for intervention days or weeks before the actual intervention occurs.
The direction of intervention is generally always known in advance be-
cause the central bank will typically come across the newswires complain-
ing about too much strength or weakness in its currency. These warnings
give traders a window of opportunity to participate in what could be signif-
icant proﬁt potentials or to stay out of the markets. The only thing to watch
out for, which you will see in a case study, is that the sharp intervention-
based rallies or sell-offs can quickly be reversed as speculators come into
the market to fade the central bank. Whether or not the market fades the
central bank depends on the frequency of central bank intervention, the
success rate, the magnitude of the intervention, the timing of the interven-
tion, and whether fundamentals support intervention. Overall, though, in-
tervention is much more prevalent in emerging market currencies than in
the G-7 currencies since countries such as Thailand, Malaysia, and South
Korea need to prevent their local currencies from appreciating too signif-
icantly such that the appreciation would hinder economic recovery and
reduce the competitiveness of the country’s exports. The rarity of G-7 in-
tervention makes the instances even more signiﬁcant.
Japan
The biggest culprit of intervention in the G-7 markets over the past few
years has been the Bank of Japan (BOJ). In 2003, the Japanese government
spent a record Y20.1 trillion on intervention. This compares to the previous
record of Y7.64 trillion that was spent in 1999. In the month of December
2003 (between November 27 and December 26) alone, the Japanese gov-
ernment sold Y2.25 trillion. The amount it spent on intervention that year
represented 84 percent of the country’s trade surplus. As an export-based
economy, excess strength in the Japanese yen poses a signiﬁcant risk to the
country’s manufacturers. The frequency and strength of BOJ intervention
over the past few years created an invisible ﬂoor under USD/JPY. Although
this ﬂoor has gradually descended from 115 to 100 between 2002 and 2005,
the market still has an ingrained fear of seeing the hand of the BOJ and the
Japanese Ministry of Finance once again. This fear is well justiﬁed because
in the event of BOJ intervention, the average 100-pip daily range can easily


--- PAGE 213 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
197
triple. Additionally, at the exact time of intervention, USD/JPY has easily
skyrocketed 100 pips in a matter of minutes.
In the ﬁrst case study shown in Figure 10.23, the Japanese govern-
ment came into the market and bought U.S. dollars and sold 1.04 trillion
yen (approximately US$9 billion) on May 19, 2003. The intervention hap-
pened around 7:00 a.m. EST. Prior to the intervention, USD/JPY was trad-
ing around 115.20. When intervention occurred at 7:00 a.m., prices jumped
30 pips in one minute. By 7:30, USD/JPY was a full 100 pips higher. At
2:30 p.m. EST, USD/JPY was 220 pips higher. Intervention generally results
in anywhere between 100- and 200-pip movements. Trading on the side of
intervention can be very proﬁtable (though risky) even if prices end up
reversing.
The second USD/JPY example (Figure 10.24) shows how a trader could
still be on the side of intervention and proﬁt even though prices reversed
later in the day. On January 9, 2004, the Japanese government came into
the market to buy dollars and sell 1.664 trillion yen (approximately US$15
billion). Prior to the intervention, USD/JPY was trading at approximately
106.60. When the BOJ came into the market at 12:22 a.m. EST, prices
jumped 35 pips. Three minutes later, USD/JPY was 100 pips higher. Five
minutes later, USD/JPY peaked 150 pips above the preintervention level. A
half hour afterward, USD/JPY was still 100 pips above the 12:22 a.m. price
of USD/JPY. Although prices eventually traded back down to 106.60, for
those watching the markets, going in the same direction at the time of in-
tervention still would have been proﬁtable.
The key is not to be greedy, because USD/JPY could very well reverse
if the market believes that fundamentals really warrant a stronger yen and
FIGURE 10.23
USD/JPY May 19, 2003


--- PAGE 214 ---
198
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.24
USD/JPY January 9, 2004
weaker dollar in this case and that the Japanese government is simply slow-
ing an inevitable decline or ﬁghting a losing battle. Committing to take a
solid 100-pip proﬁt (of a 150- to 200-pip move) or using a very short-term
intraday trailing stop of 15 to 20 pips, for example, can help lock in proﬁts.
The last example of Japanese intervention, shown in Figure 10.25, is
from November 19, 2003 when the Bank of Japan sold dollars and bought
FIGURE 10.25
USD/JPY November 19, 2003


--- PAGE 215 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
199
948 billion yen (approximately US$8 billion). Before intervention, USD/JPY
was trading around 107.90 and had dipped down to 107.65. When the BOJ
came into the markets at 4:45 a.m. EST, USD/JPY jumped 40 pips in under
a minute. Ten minutes later, USD/JPY was trading at 100 pips higher at
108.65. Twenty minutes following intervention, USD/JPY was trading 150
pips higher than preintervention levels.
Eurozone
Japan is not the only major country to have intervened in its currency in
recent years. The central bank of the Eurozone also came into the market
to buy euros in 2000, when the single currency depreciated from 90 cents
to 84 cents. In January 1999, when the euro was ﬁrst launched, it was val-
ued at 1.17 against the U.S. dollar. Due to the sharp slide, the European
Central Bank (ECB) convinced the United States, Japan, the United King-
dom, and Canada to join it in coordinated intervention to prop up the euro
for the ﬁrst time ever. The Eurozone felt concerned that the market was
lacking conﬁdence in its new currency but also feared that the slide in the
currency was increasing the cost of the region’s oil imports. With energy
prices hitting 10-year highs at the time, Europe’s heavy dependence on oil
imports necessitated a stronger currency. The United States agreed to in-
tervention because buying euros and selling dollars would help to boost
the value of European imports and aid in the funding of an already grow-
ing U.S. trade deﬁcit. Tokyo joined in the intervention because it was be-
coming concerned that the weaker euro was posing a threat to Japan’s
own exports. Although the ECB did not release details on the magnitude
of its intervention, the Federal Reserve reported having purchased 1.5 bil-
lion euros against the dollar on behalf of the ECB. Even though the actual
intervention itself caught the market by surprise, the ECB gave good warn-
ing to the market with numerous bouts of verbal support from the ECB
and European Union ofﬁcials. For trading purposes, this would have given
traders an opportunity to buy euros in anticipation of intervention or to
avoid shorting the EUR/USD.
Figure 10.26 shows the price action of the EUR/USD on the day of in-
tervention. Unfortunately, there is no minute data available dating back
to September 2000, but from the daily chart we can see that on the day
that the ECB intervened in the euro (September 22, 2000) with the help
of its trade partners, the EUR/USD had a high-low range of more than
400 pips.
Even though intervention does not happen often, it is a very impor-
tant fundamental trading strategy because each time it occurs, price move-
ments are substantial.


--- PAGE 216 ---
200
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 10.26
EUR/USD September 2000
For traders, intervention has three major implications for trading:
1. Play intervention. Use concerted warnings from central bank ofﬁcials
as a signal for possible intervention—the invisible ﬂoor created by the
Japanese government has given USD/JPY bulls plenty of opportunity
to pick short-term bottoms.
2. Avoid trades that would fade intervention. There will always be con-
trarians among us, but fading intervention, though sometimes prof-
itable, entails a signiﬁcant amount of risk. One bout of intervention
by a central bank could easily trigger a sharp 100- to 150-pip move (or
more) in the currency pair, taking out stop orders and exacerbating the
move.
3. Use stops when intervention is a risk. With the 24-hour nature of the
market, intervention can occur at any time of the day. Although stops
should always be entered into the trading platform immediately after
the entry order is triggered, having stops in place is even more impor-
tant when intervention is a major risk.
USING EQUITIES TO TRADE FX
There has been a growing correlation between the equity market and the
currency market over the past few years. Part of this correlation stems
from the excesses of the Greenspan era, when traders and investors bought
everything in sight. As a result, equities and carry trades became a measure


--- PAGE 217 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
201
of risk, with both rallying in environments of strong risk appetite and falling
in environments of risk aversion. However, using equities to trade curren-
cies is more complex than simply selling the USD/JPY as stocks are falling
or buying the USD/JPY if they are rising.
Like the story of the chicken and the egg, it is difﬁcult to ﬁgure which
market is actually leading the other. Just as often as I have seen a move-
ment in equities trigger a move in currencies, the reverse has happened
as well.
There are three primary correlations that create the foundation for our
trading strategies.
Correlation between the Nikkei and the Dow
Figure 10.27 illustrates the strong correlation between the Japanese stock
index (the Nikkei 225) and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Since 2000,
the price patterns of these two indexes have mirrored each other, and a
closer look at the chart shows that the moves in the Nikkei can sometimes
be far more exaggerated than the moves in the Dow (please bear in mind
that these two indexes have not been normalized in the chart). More impor-
tant, it should be clear there are times when the Nikkei rises or falls before
the Dow and times when the Dow leads a move in the Nikkei. Correlations
Japanese Nlkkel 225 Index vs. Dow Jones Industrial Average 2000–2008
Japanese Nikkei 225 Index
Dow Jones Industrial Average
Dow Jones Industrial Average (rhs)
2000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
14000
13000
12000
11000
10000
9000
8000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Japanese Nikkei 225 Index (lhs)
FIGURE 10.27
The Nikkei 225 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average


--- PAGE 218 ---
202
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
between global stock market indexes are nothing new and not unique to
just the United States and Japan.
Correlation between the Nikkei and the USD/JPY
Figure 10.28 illustrates the correlation between the Nikkei and USD/JPY.
Although it is not as strong as the correlation in Figure 10.27, it is still
signiﬁcant. The axis for the Nikkei in this chart has been ﬂipped, which
means that USD/JPY falls when the Nikkei rallies and vice versa. When the
Japanese stock market is doing well, it reﬂects on the health of the econ-
omy and the market’s optimism, which is why it tends to be positive for
the yen as well. When the Japanese stock market starts to tank, however,
domestic and foreign investors alike become nervous and pile out of not
only Japanese equities but also the Japanese yen.
Correlation between the USD/JPY and the Dow
This leads us to the correlation between the USD/JPY and the Dow. Since
the Nikkei and the Dow are correlated like the Nikkei and USD/JPY, one
would automatically assume that the Dow and USD/JPY are correlated
as well. Although this is true, the correlation is weaker than the two
Japanese Nlkkel 225 Index vs. USD/JPY 2000–2008
Japanese Nikkei 225 Index
USD/JPY
USD/JPY (rhs)
2000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
100
110
120
130
2002
2004
2006
2008
Japanese Nikkei 225 Index (lhs)
FIGURE 10.28
The Nikkei 225 and the USD/JPY


--- PAGE 219 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
203
correlations that we have already seen, which illustrates why it is partic-
ularly important to not base your trade ideas primarily on the correlations.
It is nice to see that on a day-to-day basis, the asset classes may move in
lockstep, but that should be only a component of your trading decision and
not the primary basis for the strategy.
With this in mind, there are two different ways that I like to use equities
to trade currencies, and both incorporate either fundamental or technical
analysis.
TRADING THE CORRELATION WITH
FUNDAMENTALS
My favorite strategy is to use the correlation with fundamentals. Here
is an example of an actual trade that I recommended to subscribers of
BKTraderFX (see Figure 10.29).
On May 7, 2008, we recommended going short the New Zealand dol-
lar against the U.S. dollar for two reasons. The ﬁrst was that the Dow had
plummeted over 200 points and we believed that carry trade selling would
FIGURE 10.29
Sample Trade, BKForex Advisor
(Source: BKTraderFX.com)


--- PAGE 220 ---
204
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
continue into the Asian trading session. With an interest rate spread of 625
basis points at the time (New Zealand’s rate was 8.25 percent and the U.S.
rate was 2.00 percent), the NZD/USD was one of the few carry trades left in
the market. However, that was not the only reason we took the trade. The
primary reason was the upcoming New Zealand employment report, which
we expected to be weak. The market was looking for employment to drop
by only 0.1 percent in the ﬁrst quarter, but given the big drop in the Man-
power Index and the employment component of the Purchasing Managers
Index, we were looking for an even bigger decline. The combination of a
bearish carry trade environment and the possibility of weak New Zealand
data gave us the conﬁdence to short the New Zealand dollar at 0.7812. As
indicated by the progression of our trade, we managed to bank 107 pips.
Figure 10.30 shows how the NZD/USD was trading. Trading was heavy
all day due to the weakness in the Dow and then broke down following the
New Zealand employment numbers.
TRADING THE CORRELATION WITH
TECHNICALS
Another way to trade the correlation between equities and currencies is
with technicals. Here is a simple example. On May 1, 2008, the Dow Jones
FIGURE 10.30
NZD/USD Hourly Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 221 ---
Fundamental Trading Strategies
205
FIGURE 10.31
USD/JPY Hourly Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
Industrial Average opened strongly and rallied over 100 points in a matter
of three hours. USD/JPY, interestingly enough, did not follow higher. One
of the reasons for this lack of follow-through may have been the strong re-
sistance provided by the 100-day simple moving average, as indicated by
Figure 10.31. Given the strength of the equity market, a possible strategy
would have been to buy on the break of the moving average in the expec-
tation that stocks would take USD/JPY higher in the U.S. session and the
move would continue into the Asian trading session. The entry point would
have to be above the attempted break four hours before at 104.21. As in-
dicated in Figure 10.27, such a strong move in the Dow should lead to a
similar rally in the Nikkei when the markets opened for trading. The Dow
proceeded to rise another 100 points by the time the market closed, and
even though USD/JPY did not race higher immediately, it did quietly grind
higher throughout the Asian and European trading sessions. The key to
using technicals with equities is to have ﬂow on your side.


--- PAGE 222 ---


--- PAGE 223 ---
C H A P T E R 11
How to Trade
Like a Hedge
Fund Manager
T
his chapter on how to trade like a hedge fund manager is really about
the steps to developing a successful trading strategy. Having worked
with many money managers and being involved in the process of
launching managed fund products, I have realized that all money managers
work in a similar way. Their strategies may be different, but the way they
come about developing these strategies is not. The reason there are com-
mon threads is because professional fund managers need to have account-
ability. In other words, they need to understand their own methodology
inside and out.
The difference between a professional and an unprofessional trader is
that a professional never goes into a trade blindly. This is important be-
cause in order for professional money managers to be conﬁdent enough to
solicit investments into their funds, not only do they need to have a battle-
tested strategy, but they also need to know when the fund succeeds, when
it fails, and how bad things can get.
As retail or individual traders, our $20,000 accounts are just as im-
portant as any $20 million hedge fund. In fact, our accounts may be even
more important, because we are trading with our own money whereas the
$20 million hedge fund manager is most likely trading with other people’s
money. Therefore, if all hedge fund managers follow a ﬁve-step process
in developing their trading strategies, there is no reason why individual
traders should not to do so as well.
The best way to develop a trading strategy is to follow a ﬁve-step top-
down approach:
207


--- PAGE 224 ---
208
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
1. Properly deﬁning the trading strategy.
2. The art of entering and exiting.
3. Test drive.
4. Getting intimate.
5. Self-reﬂection.
PROPERLY DEFINING THE
TRADING STRATEGY
Every hedge fund manager, like every trader, follows a different method-
ology. Some will only use fundamental analysis, while others will only use
technical analysis. The ﬁrst thing to do is to ﬁgure out what type of trader
you are and what type of style you want to trade in. This chapter will not
tell you which style of trading (fundamental versus technical or short-term
versus long-term) will be the most proﬁtable, because there isn’t one style
that is best. In Millionaire Traders: How Everyday People Beat Wall Street
at Its Own Game (John Wiley & Sons, 2007), we interviewed 12 successful
traders from all walks of life and learned that there isn’t just one way to
trading success. Every trader is different; some would hold positions for
weeks and months, while others would hold them for mere seconds.
There are four key things that you need to think about when deﬁning a
strategy, and these need to be done before you start trading. Trade with a
plan and do not develop that plan on the ﬂy.
Fundamental or Technical?
The ﬁrst step to deﬁning a trading strategy is to ﬁgure out whether you
want to trade based on fundamentals or technicals, or a combination of
both. When fund managers develop systematic trading strategies, clear-cut
rules are developed so that they can be coded. Although not everyone will
be coding their trading strategies, there is a lesson to be learned from that
process, as one of the primary reasons traders fail is because they get too
emotional. Coming up with your own rules is extremely important, because
following rules takes the emotion out of trading. Figuring out whether you
want to base your trades on news or a technical indicator is only the initial
step to deﬁning your trading strategy.
What Currencies Will You Trade?
The second step is to determine which currency pairs you want to trade,
because not all currencies are created equal. In FX, there are generally


--- PAGE 225 ---
How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager
209
two types of trading strategies—trend following or range trading. Most
hedge funds are trend following because of the one-way directional bias
of the currency market, but many people are contrarians by nature and
may choose to range trade instead. There is no wrong or right choice, but
in order to increase the probability of success, many hedge fund managers
will narrow the currency pairs that the system will trade. Rarely have I seen
professional traders apply the same strategy to every single currency pair.
They will almost always have currency pairs that they trade often and cur-
rency pairs that they never trade. For example, if your trading strategy calls
for a risk of no more than 100 pips on each trade, currency pairs with wide
ranges like the GBP/JPY and the EUR/CAD should be avoided and probably
not traded, because even if the currency pair eventually moves in your de-
sired direction, its wide swings may stop you out before doing so. Another
example would be to apply range-trading strategies only to range-trading
currency pairs and apply trending strategies to trending currency pairs.
The CHF/JPY, for example, is a great currency pair for a range-trading strat-
egy and a horrible one for a trend-trading strategy, because except for one
spike lower, it has been trapped in a 300-pip range from September 2007 to
March 2008. Therefore, a person with a range-trading strategy should look
to trade only currency pairs like the CHF/JPY, while trend traders should
avoid the CHF/JPY at all costs.
When it comes to currencies, another thing to consider is majors ver-
sus crosses. Major currency pairs such as the EUR/USD or the USD/JPY
tend to be very sensitive to what is happening in the U.S. dollar, whereas
this is generally not the case for the crosses, because they do not include
the U.S. dollar. News traders may ﬁnd this tip particularly useful, because
unless you are trading U.S. data, crosses could actually be better bets be-
cause their price action may be less distorted by the market’s appetite for
U.S. dollars.
What Time Frame Will You Trade?
The third step to deﬁning your trading strategy is to determine what time
frame you want to trade. A strategy that works on a daily chart will prob-
ably have far less accuracy on a 5-minute chart. For example, if you are
using the inside day strategy, you will see that inside days are far more
common on intraday charts and far less common on daily charts. This is
why they are extremely accurate when they do appear on daily charts; the
rarest things can be the most valuable.
Finally, when it comes to time frames, other things that need to be
considered include whether you will hold positions overnight and over the
weekend. For example, short-term traders may ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to
close their trades if they are not working after a certain number of hours


--- PAGE 226 ---
210
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
or when the market switches into the Asian trading session. This would ap-
ply for traders reacting to news, because if the trade does not move in your
favor after a few hours, the momentum from the news release has prob-
ably waned. As for the weekend, occasionally something big may happen
between Friday night and Sunday afternoon. Unless you have stops that
can absorb any shocks or you know that there isn’t a signiﬁcant event risk,
closing positions before the weekend may also be something to consider.
THE ART OF ENTERING AND EXITING
In an interview for Millionaire Traders: How Everyday People Beat Wall
Street at Its Own Game, Rob Booker made a fantastic analogy. We were
talking about whether the entry of a trade or the exit is more important, and
Rob likened this to ﬂying and asking a pilot which is more important, the
takeoff or the landing. Without even needing to ask a pilot, as passengers,
we will all agree that the same degree of precision needs to be applied to
both the takeoff and the landing. This is true for trading as well.
The majority of traders spend their time trying to ﬁgure out the best
entry strategies by looking for the perfect combination of indicators for
buy and sell signals, while their exit strategies are usually relegated to be-
ing nothing more than an afterthought. Yet this afterthought often is what
differentiates consistently proﬁtable traders from ones who are perpetu-
ally looking for a better trading strategy. Too often have I heard traders
complain about how they let a winning trade become a losing one.
When hedge fund managers design trading strategies, they give a great
deal of thought to both entries and exits. There are primarily four different
ways to enter or exit a trade:
1. Single entry, single exit: With a single entry and a single exit, traders
basically put on their entire position at one price and exit the entire
position at one price.
2. Single entry, multiple exits: With a single entry and multiple exits,
traders enter their entire position at one price but scale out of the po-
sition at different prices. This tactic is usually used to ride a breakout
or trend for as long as possible while banking some proﬁts along the
way.
3. Multiple entries, single exit: With multiple entries and a single exit,
traders scale into a position at different prices but end up closing the
entire position at one price. This tactic is used by traders who are
averaging down and averaging up. To average down means to add to
a position as it moves against you with the hope of attaining a better


--- PAGE 227 ---
How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager
211
average price. To average up means to add to a position as it moves in
your favor.
4. Multiple entries, multiple exits: With multiple entries and multiple
exits, traders scale both into and out of their positions. This is a tactic
frequently used by trend traders. They average up into a position by
adding to winning trades and scale out of the position to capitalize on
as much of the trend as possible.
With automatic systems, entry and exit strategies are set in stone and
coded into the system. Traders should try to approach entries and exits in
the same way by deciding which of the four combinations to use before
laying on a trade. For those traders who like to average up or down, an
important question to ask is how low or how high you are willing to buy. If
you keep on adding to a losing trade, at some point it just becomes smarter
to bite the bullet, take the loss, and admit that the move you were initially
looking for will not happen or the trend has changed. A good rule of thumb
is to average down no more than three times. When it comes to stops, there
should be no art involved—have a set rule on placing stops and stick to it.
TEST DRIVE
You will never buy a car without test-driving it, so you should never trade
a strategy without back-testing it! For hedge funds and developers of au-
tomated trading systems, back-testing is extremely important because if
a trading strategy did not make money in the past, how can they believe
that the strategy will make money in the future? Many FX traders will learn
strategies from their friends, trading coaches, or even this book, but no one
should ever just follow a strategy blindly. Make sure it is back-tested and
forward-tested.
For traders who are particularly good at programming, code your strat-
egy using something like TradeStation, eSignal, or Meta Trader, run the
results, and make sure that it is proﬁtable.
Traders who do not know how to code should do the visual back
test. Open your charts, apply your indicators, and look for a minimum of
20 examples of the strategy working. Then downgrade the time frame of
your charts to make sure that the strategy could have been executed at
your desired price. For example, if you are trading a strategy based on
hourly charts, make sure there are no spikes on the 5-minute charts.
Once you have found your back-tested examples, it is time to forward-
test. One of the great things about trading currencies is the wide availability
of demo and mini accounts. It is important to live test with a small amount


--- PAGE 228 ---
212
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
of money, because once there is actual money involved, a whole differ-
ent set of emotions will arise, and controlling those emotions is an impor-
tant part of developing the discipline you need to trade larger amounts of
money. The best thing to do is to focus on the changes in pips and not the
changes in dollars.
GETTING INTIMATE
The fourth step to thinking like a hedge fund manager is to get intimate
with your trading strategy, because not all trading strategies are alike.
Understanding Performance
When it comes to performance, there are two primary types of trading
strategies—one that has a high percentage of proﬁtable trades and one that
has a high proﬁt factor.
In strategies that have a high percentage of proﬁtable trades, usually
the amount of pips made in winning trades is approximately the same as
the amount of pips lost in losing trades. An example would be a strategy
where 8 out 10 trades are winners, with each winning trade making 20 pips
and each unproﬁtable trade losing 20 pips. Although this does not satisfy
the textbook description of a good risk-to-reward ratio, if the number of
proﬁtable trades is far higher than the number of losing trades, the strategy
is still a solid one. In the previous example, the net proﬁt for the 10 trades
would still be 120 pips. Therefore, if you have a strategy similar to this and
it starts to have six or seven consecutive losers, you know that it is time to
seriously reexamine the strategy.
For strategies that have a high proﬁt factor but a low percentage of
proﬁtable trades, having a string of losers may be a part of the trading
strategy. This applies particularly to breakout traders who may take small
positions with tight stops in anticipation of a big breakout. Although they
may get stopped out often for 30 or 40 pips, when the breakout occurs, the
eventual move could be to the degree of 400 or 500 pips.
The key here is to know exactly what type of market environment your
strategy performs well in and what type of market environment your strat-
egy fails in, because only then will you know when it is time to pull the plug.
Understanding Drawdown
In the currency market, managing losses is extremely important. Many peo-
ple who are new to the currency market argue that trading FX is far more
dangerous than trading any other asset. In some ways they are wrong and


--- PAGE 229 ---
How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager
213
in some ways they are right. With only eight major currencies to trade, the
FX market is much easier to understand than other markets. Also, since
most people trade only the G-10 currencies, economic data cannot really
be manipulated and there will almost never be a scenario like WorldCom
or Enron. On a day-to-day basis, currency rates usually move no more than
1 to 2 percent, which actually makes them one of the least volatile assets
to invest or trade in. However, the availability of very high leverage does
make trading currencies more dangerous. Some brokers offer as much as
400-to-1 leverage, which makes a 1 percent move more like 400 percent. It
therefore becomes much easier to blow up your trading account. Thank-
fully, leverage is customizable, and it is important for traders to actively
manage their risk.
Understanding the drawdown of your trading strategy helps to man-
age risk by giving you a frame of reference for determining when to pull
the plug and when to sit tight. A drawdown is deﬁned as the reduction
in account equity from a trade or series of trades. All professional money
managers know the maximum drawdowns of their trading strategies. For
example, I once tested a strategy involving carry trades, and the maximum
drawdown for the strategy over the past 10 years was 15 percent. With that
number in mind, I knew that if the drawdown going forward hits 10 per-
cent, it does not necessarily mean that the strategy has failed. However,
if the drawdown hits 15 percent I should start getting very worried; and if
it hits 20 percent, then I know that this may be a completely new trading
environment not previously accounted for in the back test, and for that rea-
son, it may be time to seriously consider pulling the plug, admitting that I
am wrong, and terminating the strategy.
When it comes to drawdowns, there are three main things that all
traders need to know about their strategies. The ﬁrst is the average draw-
down on a given trade; this is important because it lets you know whether
the trade is behaving in accordance with your strategy. The second is the
degree of the biggest drawdown; this lets you know how bad it can get.
Finally, you need to know whether the drawdown is on a closing or an
intratrade basis. Oftentimes the drawdown or maximum loss on a closed
trade may be different from the drawdown or ﬂoating loss on an open
trade.
SELF-REFLECTION
The last step of thinking or trading like a hedge fund manager is self-
reﬂection. A few years ago, after I conducted an FX trading workshop in
Malaysia, a trader came to me for advice. He told me that he had a trading
strategy that worked well in nearly all market environments except when


--- PAGE 230 ---
214
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
news was being released. Interestingly enough, he asked me what I thought
he should do, and I simply said, “Don’t trade when news is being released!”
Oftentimes we become so absorbed with trading that we do not notice
the obvious. This why it is important to spend some time on a weekly or
monthly basis to go over or reﬂect on your trading. At the end of every
week, Boris Schlossberg, with whom I run BKTraderFX, and I will sit down
and go over each and every one of our trades. We will ask ourselves why
a particular trade worked, why it did not work, and what we could have
done better. We will review both the winning and losing trades to look to
ﬁnd room for improvement. In fact, with every trade that we take, we will
ask ourselves if this is in line with our trading strategy, and if not, will
we end up regretting making the same mistakes at our end-of-week review
sessions.
For the trader in Malaysia, the small improvement that he needed to
make may have simply involved avoiding news releases, which can be ap-
plicable for range traders in general. Other people may realize that they are
taking proﬁts too early or ﬁnd that their performance improves by limiting
their trading to certain times of the day. Small and simple changes such as
these can make a long-term difference for all traders.


--- PAGE 231 ---
C H A P T E R 12
Proﬁles and
Unique
Characteristics
of Major
Currency Pairs
I
t is important for all traders to have a good grasp of the general eco-
nomic characteristics of each of the most commonly traded currencies
in order to gauge what economic data and factors in general may have
the most signiﬁcant impact on a currency’s movements. Some currencies
tend to track commodity prices, while others may move in complete con-
trast. Traders also need to be aware of the difference between expected
and actual data. That is, the most important aspect of interpreting news and
its impact on the foreign exchange markets is the determination of whether
the market is expecting a piece of news. This is known as the “market
discount mechanism.” The correlation between the currency markets and
news is very important. News or data that are in line with expectations have
less of an impact on currency movements than unexpected news or data.
Therefore, short-term traders need to closely monitor expectations of the
market.
CURRENCY PROFILE: U.S.
DOLLAR (USD)
Broad Economic Overview
The United States is the world’s leading economic power, with gross do-
mestic product (GDP) valued at over US$13 trillion in 2006. This is the
highest in the world, and, based on the purchasing power parity model, it
is three times the size of Japan’s output, ﬁve times the size of Germany’s,
215


--- PAGE 232 ---
216
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
and seven times the size of the United Kingdom’s. The United States is
primarily a service-oriented country with nearly 80 percent of its GDP
coming from real estate, transportation, ﬁnance, health care, and business
services. Yet the sheer size of the U.S. manufacturing sector still makes
the U.S. dollar particularly sensitive to developments within the sector.
With the United States having the most liquid equity and ﬁxed income
markets in the world, foreign investors have consistently increased their
purchases of U.S. assets. According to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), foreign direct investments into the United States are equal to ap-
proximately 40 percent of total global net inﬂows for the United States.
On a net basis, the United States absorbs 71 percent of total foreign sav-
ings. This means that if foreign investors are not satisﬁed with their re-
turns in the U.S. asset markets and they decide to repatriate their funds,
this would have a signiﬁcant effect on U.S. asset values and the U.S. dol-
lar. More speciﬁcally, if foreign investors sell their U.S. dollar-denominated
asset holdings in search of higher-yielding assets elsewhere, this would typ-
ically result in a decline in the value of the U.S. asset, as well as the U.S.
dollar.
The import and export volume of the United States also exceeds that
of any other country. This is due to the country’s sheer size, as true import
and export volume represent a mere 12 percent of GDP. Despite this large
activity, on a netted basis, the United States is running a very large current
account deﬁcit of over $800 billion as of 2006. This is a major problem
that the U.S. economy has been grappling with for more than 10 years.
However, in the past ﬁve years, it has become an even larger problem since
foreign funding of the deﬁcit has been languishing as foreign central banks
consider diversifying reserve assets out of dollars and into euros. The large
current account deﬁcit makes the U.S. dollar highly sensitive to changes in
capital ﬂows. In fact, in order to prevent a further decline in the U.S. dollar
as a result of trade, the United States needs to attract a signiﬁcant amount
of capital inﬂows per day (in 2006, this number was over $2 billion per day).
The United States is also the largest trading partner for most other
countries, representing 20 percent of total world trade. These rankings are
very important because changes in the value of the dollar and its volatility
will impact U.S. trading activities with these respective countries. More
speciﬁcally, a weaker dollar could boost U.S. exports to its trade partners,
whereas a stronger dollar could curb foreign demand for U.S. exports. Here
are the breakdowns of the most important trading partners for the United
States (in order of importance).
The list of export markets is important because it ranks the importance
of growth and political stability of these countries for the United States. For
example, should Canadian growth slow, its demand for U.S. exports would
also fall, which would have a ripple effect on U.S. growth.


--- PAGE 233 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
217
Leading Export Markets
1. Canada
2. Mexico
3. Japan
4. United Kingdom
5. European Union
Leading Import Sources
1. Canada
2. China
3. Mexico
4. Japan
5. European Union
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, “U.S. International Transactions,”
2006 Report.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—The Federal
Reserve
The Federal Reserve Board (Fed) is the monetary policy authority of the
United States. The Fed is responsible for setting and implementing mone-
tary policy through the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The vot-
ing members of the FOMC are the seven governors of the Federal Reserve
Board, plus ﬁve presidents of the 12 district reserve banks. The FOMC
holds eight meetings per year, which are widely watched for interest rate
announcements or changes in growth expectations.
The Fed has a high degree of independence to set monetary authority.
It is less subject to political inﬂuences, as most members are accorded long
terms that allow them to remain in ofﬁce through periods of alternate party
dominance in both the presidency and Congress.
The Federal Reserve issues a biannual Monetary Policy Report in
February and July followed by the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony where
the Federal Reserve chairman responds to questions from both the
Congress and the Banking Committees in regard to this report. This report
is important to watch, as it contains the FOMC forecasts for GDP growth,
inﬂation, and unemployment.
The Fed, unlike most other central banks, has a mandate or “long-run
objectives” of “price stability and sustainable economic growth.” In order
to adhere to these goals, the Fed has to use monetary policy to limit inﬂa-


--- PAGE 234 ---
218
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
tion and unemployment and to achieve balanced growth. The most popular
tools that the Fed uses to control monetary policy are open market opera-
tions and the federal funds rate.
Open Market Operations
Open market operations involve Fed pur-
chases of government securities, including Treasury bills, notes, and
bonds. This is one of the most popular methods for the Fed to signal and im-
plement policy changes. Generally speaking, an increase in Fed purchases
of government securities decreases interest rates, while selling of govern-
ment securities by the Fed boosts interest rates.
Federal Funds Target
The federal funds target rate is the key pol-
icy target of the Federal Reserve. It is the interest rate for borrowing that
the Fed offers to its member banks. The Fed tends to increase this rate to
curb inﬂation or decrease this rate to promote growth and consumption.
Changes to this rate are closely watched by the market, tend to imply ma-
jor changes in policy, and typically have large ramiﬁcations for global ﬁxed
income and equity markets. The market also pays particular attention to
the statement released by the Federal Reserve, as it can offer signals for
future monetary policy actions.
In terms of ﬁscal policy, that is in the hands of the U.S. Treasury. Fis-
cal policy decisions include determining the appropriate level of taxes and
government spending. In fact, although the markets pay more attention to
the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury is the actual government body that
determines dollar policy. That is, if the Treasury feels that the USD rate on
the foreign exchange market is under- or overvalued, the U.S. Treasury is
the government body that gives the New York Federal Reserve Board the
authority and instructions to intervene in the foreign exchange market by
physically selling or buying U.S. dollars. Therefore, the Treasury’s view on
dollar policy and changes to that view is generally very important to the
currency market.
Over the past few decades, the Treasury and Fed ofﬁcials have main-
tained a “strong dollar” bias. This was particularly true under former Trea-
sury Secretary Paul O’Neill, who was frequently very vocal in advocating
a strong dollar. Under the Bush administration, Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson has reiterated this view and stated that he, too, favors a strong dol-
lar. However, the Bush administration has done little to stem the dollar’s
slide between 2003 and 2008, which has led the market to believe that the
administration actually favors a behind-the-scenes weak dollar policy and
uses it as a tool to spur growth. Yet, for political reasons, it is not likely
that the government would vocally change its stance to supporting a weak
dollar policy.


--- PAGE 235 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
219
Important Characteristics of the U.S. Dollar
r Over 90 percent of all currency deals involve the dollar.
The most liquid currencies in the foreign exchange market are the
EUR/USD, USD/JPY, GBP/USD, and USD/CHF. These currencies rep-
resent the most frequently traded currencies in the world, and all of
these currency pairs involve the U.S. dollar. In fact, 90 percent of all
currency deals involve the U.S. dollar. This explains the importance of
the U.S. dollar to all foreign exchange traders. As a result, the most
important economic data that usually move the market are dollar fun-
damentals.
r Prior to September 11, the U.S. dollar was considered one of
the world’s premier safe haven currencies.
The reason why the U.S. dollar was previously considered one
of the world’s premier safe haven currencies was because prior to
September 11, 2001, the risk of severe U.S. instability was very low.
The United States was known to have one of the safest and most de-
veloped markets in the world. The safe haven status of the dollar al-
lowed the United States to attract investment at a discounted rate of
return, resulting in 76 percent of global currency reserves being held
in dollars. Another reason why currency reserves are held in U.S. dol-
lars is the fact that the dollar is the world’s dominant factoring cur-
rency. In choosing a reserve currency, the dollar’s safe haven status
also played a major role for foreign central banks. However, post-9/11,
foreign holders of U.S. assets, including central banks, have pared their
dollar holdings as a result of increased U.S. uncertainty and decreased
interest rates. The emergence of the euro has also threatened the U.S.
dollar’s status as the world’s premier reserve currency. Many central
banks have already begun to diversify their reserves by reducing their
dollar holdings and increasing their euro holdings. This will continue
to be a major trend that all traders should watch for in the years ahead.
r The U.S. dollar moves in the opposite direction from gold
prices.
As indicated in Figure 12.1, gold prices and the U.S. dollar have
historically had a near perfect inverse relationship and are near perfect
mirror images of each other; this means that when gold prices rise, the
dollar falls, and vice versa. This inverse relationship stems from the
fact that gold is measured in dollars. Dollar depreciation due to global
uncertainty has been the primary reason for gold appreciation, as gold
is commonly viewed as the ultimate form of money. Gold is also seen
as the premier safe haven commodity; therefore, in times of geopoliti-
cal uncertainty investors tend to ﬂock to gold, which in essence hurts
the dollar.


--- PAGE 236 ---
220
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Price of Gold vs. Dollar Index 2000–2008 
1000
800
600
Price of Gold
400
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Price of Gold (Ihs)
Dollar Index (rhs)
70
80
90
100
Dollar Index
110
120
FIGURE 12.1
Gold versus Dollar Chart
r Many emerging market countries peg their local currencies to
the dollar.
Pegging a currency to the dollar pertains to the basic idea that a
government agrees to maintain the U.S. dollar as a reserve currency by
offering to buy or sell any amount of domestic currency at the pegged
rate for the reserve currency. These governments typically have to also
promise to hold reserve currency at least equal to the amount of local
currency in circulation. This is very important because these central
banks have become large holders of U.S. dollars and take an active
interest in managing their ﬁxed or ﬂoating pegs. Countries with cur-
rencies pegged to the dollar include Hong Kong and, up until July 2005,
China as well. China is a very active participant in the currency market
because its maximum ﬂoat per day is controlled within a narrow band
based on the previous day’s closing rate against the USD. Any ﬂuctu-
ations beyond this band during the day will be subject to intervention
by the central bank, which will include buying or selling of U.S. dollars.


--- PAGE 237 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
221
Prior to July 21, 2005, China had pegged its currency at a rate of 8.3
yuan to the U.S. dollar. After years of pressure to revalue its currency,
China adjusted its exchange rate to 8.11 yuan and reset the rate to the
closing price of the currency each day. Along with this, China is grad-
ually moving to a managed ﬂoat referencing a basket of currencies.
Over the past year or two, the market has paid particular atten-
tion to the purchasing habits of these central banks. Talk of reserve
diversiﬁcation or more currency ﬂexibility in the exchange rates of
these Asian countries means that these central banks may have less
of a need to own U.S. dollars and dollar-denominated assets. If this is
true, it could be very negative for the U.S. dollar over the long term.
r Interest rate differentials between U.S. Treasuries and foreign
bonds are strongly followed.
The interest rate differential between U.S. Treasuries and foreign
bonds is a very important relationship that professional FX traders fol-
low. It can be a strong indicator of potential currency movements be-
cause the U.S. market is one of the largest markets in the world and
investors are very sensitive to the yields that are offered by U.S. as-
sets. Large investors are constantly looking for assets with the highest
yields. As yields in the U.S. decrease or if yields abroad increase, this
would induce investors to sell their U.S. assets and purchase foreign
assets. Selling U.S. ﬁxed income or equity assets would inﬂuence the
currency market because that would require selling U.S. dollars and
buying the foreign currency. If U.S. yields increase or foreign yields de-
crease, investors in general would be more inclined to purchase U.S.
assets, therefore boosting the USD.
r Keep an eye on the Dollar Index.
Market participants closely follow the U.S. Dollar Index (USDX) as
a gauge of overall dollar strength or weakness. The USDX is a futures
contract traded on the New York Board of Trade that is calculated
using the trade-weighted geometric average of six currencies. It is im-
portant to follow this index because when market participants are
reporting general dollar weakness or a decline in the trade-weighted
dollar, they are typically referring to this index. Also, even though the
dollar may have moved signiﬁcantly against one single currency, it may
not have moved as signiﬁcantly on a trade-weighted basis. This is im-
portant because some central bankers may choose to focus on the
trade-weighted index instead of the individual currency pair’s perfor-
mance against the dollar.
r U.S. currency trading is impacted by stock and bond markets.
There is a strong correlation between a country’s equity and
ﬁxed income markets and its currency: If the equity market is rising,
generally speaking, foreign investment dollars should be coming


--- PAGE 238 ---
222
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
in to seize the opportunity. If equity markets are falling, domestic
investors will be selling their shares of local publicly traded ﬁrms only
to seize investment opportunities abroad. With ﬁxed income markets,
economies boasting the most valuable ﬁxed income opportunities
with the highest yields will be capable of attracting foreign investment.
Daily ﬂuctuations and developments in any of these markets reﬂect
movement of foreign portfolio investments, which in the end would
require foreign exchange transactions. Cross-border merger and
acquisition activities are also very important for FX traders to watch.
Large M&A deals, particularly those that involve a signiﬁcant cash
portion, will have a notable impact on the currency markets, the
reason being that the acquirer will need to buy or sell dollars to fund
its cross-border acquisition target.
Important Economic Indicators for the
United States
All of the following economic indicators are important for the U.S. dollar.
However, since the U.S. economy is service oriented, it is important to pay
particular attention to numbers for the service sector.
Employment—Nonfarm
Payrolls
The employment report is the
most important and widely watched indicator on the economic calendar.
Its importance is mostly due to political inﬂuences rather than pure eco-
nomic reasons, as the Fed is under strict pressure to keep unemployment
under control. As a result, interest rate policy is directly inﬂuenced by
employment conditions. The monthly report consists of data from two
different surveys, the Establishment Survey and the Household Survey.
The Establishment Survey takes data from nonfarm payroll employment,
average hourly workweek, and the aggregate hours index. The Household
Survey gives information on the labor force, household employment, and
the unemployment rate. Currency traders tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted monthly unemployment rates and any meaningful changes in
nonfarm payrolls.
Consumer Price Index
The consumer price index (CPI) is a key gauge
of inﬂation. The index measures the prices on a ﬁxed basket of consumer
goods. Economists tend to focus more on the CPI-U or the core inﬂation
rate, which excludes the volatile food and energy components. The indica-
tor is widely watched by the FX markets as it drives a lot of activity.
Producer Price Index
The producer price index (PPI) is a family
of indexes that measures average changes in selling prices received by


--- PAGE 239 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
223
domestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks changes in prices for
nearly every goods-producing industry in the domestic economy, includ-
ing agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, ﬁsheries, manufactur-
ing, and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted ﬁnished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a monthly,
quarterly, and annualized basis.
Gross Domestic Product
Gross domestic product (GDP) is a mea-
sure of the total production and consumption of goods and services in
the United States. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) constructs two
complementary measures of GDP, one based on income and one based on
expenditures. The advance release of GDP, which occurs the month after
each quarter ends, contains some BEA estimates for data not yet released,
inventories, and trade balance, and is the most important release. Other
releases of GDP are typically not very signiﬁcant unless a major revision is
made.
International Trade
The balance of trade represents the difference
between exports and imports of foreign trade in goods and services. Mer-
chandise data are provided for U.S. total foreign trade with all countries,
detail for trade with speciﬁc countries and regions of the world, as well as
for individual commodities. Traders tend to focus on seasonally adjusted
trade numbers over three-month periods as single-month trade periods are
regarded as unreliable.
Employment Cost Index
The employment cost index (ECI) data is
based on a survey of employer payrolls in the third month of the quarter
for the pay period ending on the 12th day of the month. The survey is a
probability sample of approximately 3,600 private industry employers and
700 state and local governments, public schools, and public hospitals. The
big advantage of the ECI is that it includes nonwage costs, which add as
much as 30 percent to total labor costs. Reaction to the ECI is often muted
as it is generally very stable. It should be noted, however, that it is a favorite
indicator of the Fed.
Institute for Supply Management (Formerly NAPM)
The Insti-
tute for Supply Management (ISM) releases a monthly composite index
based on surveys of 300 purchasing managers nationwide representing 20
different industries regarding manufacturing activity. Index values above
50 indicate an expanding economy, while values below 50 are indicative of
contraction. The number is widely watched, as former Fed Chairman Alan
Greenspan once stated it is one of his favorite indicators.


--- PAGE 240 ---
224
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Industrial Production
The Index of Industrial Production is a set
of indexes that measures the monthly physical output of U.S. factories,
mines, and utilities. The index is broken down by industry type and market
type. Foreign exchange markets focus mostly on the seasonally adjusted
monthly change in aggregate ﬁgure. Increases in the index are typically
dollar positive.
Consumer Conﬁdence
The Consumer Conﬁdence Survey measures
the level of conﬁdence individual households have in the performance of
the economy. Survey questionnaires are sent out to a nationwide represen-
tative sample of 5,000 households, of which approximately 3,500 respond.
Households are asked ﬁve questions: (1) a rating of business conditions
in the household’s area, (2) a rating of business conditions in six months,
(3) job availability in the area, (4) job availability in six months, and (5) fam-
ily income in six months. Responses are seasonally adjusted and an index is
constructed for each response; then a composite index is fashioned based
on the aggregate responses. Market participants perceive rising consumer
conﬁdence as a precursor to higher consumer spending. Higher consumer
spending is often seen as a spark that accelerates inﬂation.
Retail Sales
The Retail Sales Index measures the total goods sold by
a sampling of retail stores over the course of a month. This index is used
as a gauge of consumer consumption and consumer conﬁdence. The most
important number is typically ex-autos, as auto sales can vary from month
to month. Retail sales can be quite volatile due to seasonality; however, the
index is an important indicator of the general health of the economy.
Treasury International Capital Flow Data (TIC Data)
The Trea-
sury international capital ﬂow data measures the amount of capital inﬂow
into the United States on a monthly basis. This economic release has be-
come increasingly important over the past few years since the funding of
the U.S. deﬁcit is becoming more of an issue. Aside from the headline num-
ber itself, the market also pays close attention to the ofﬁcial ﬂows, which
represent the demand for U.S. government debt by foreign central banks.
CURRENCY PROFILE: EURO (EUR)
Broad Economic Overview
The European Union (EU) was developed as an institutional framework
for the construction of a united Europe. The EU currently consists of
15 member countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,


--- PAGE 241 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
225
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. All of these countries share the
euro as a common currency, except for Denmark, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom. The 12 common currency countries constitute the European
Monetary Union (EMU) and also share a single monetary policy dictated
by the European Central Bank (ECB).
The EMU is the world’s second largest economic power, with gross
domestic product valued at approximately US$12 trillion in 2006. With a
highly developed ﬁxed income, equity, and futures market, the EMU has
the second most attractive investment market for domestic and interna-
tional investors. In the past, the EMU has had difﬁculty in attracting foreign
direct investment or large capital ﬂows. In fact, the EMU is a net supplier
of foreign direct investments, accounting for approximately 45 percent of
total world capital outﬂows and only 19 percent of capital inﬂows. The
primary reason is because historically U.S. assets have had solid returns.
As a result, the United States absorbs 71 percent of total foreign savings.
However, with the euro becoming a more established currency and the
European Monetary Union beginning to incorporate even more members,
the euro’s importance as a reserve currency is rising in tandem. As a result,
capital ﬂows to Europe have been increasing. With foreign central banks
expected to diversify their euro reserve holdings even further, demand for
euros should continue to increase.
The EMU is both a trade-driven and capital ﬂow–driven economy;
therefore trade is very important to the economies within the EMU. Un-
like most major economies, the EMU does not have a large trade deﬁcit or
surplus. In fact, the EMU went from a small trade deﬁcit in 2003 to a small
trade surplus in 2006. EU exports comprise approximately 19 percent of
world trade, while EU imports account for only 17 percent of total world
imports. Because of the size of the EMU’s trade with the rest of the world,
it has signiﬁcant power in the international trade arena. International clout
is one of the primary goals in the formation of the EU, because it allows
the individual countries to group as one entity and negotiate on an equal
playing ﬁeld with the United States, which is their largest trading partner.
The breakdowns of the most important trading partners for the EU are:
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. Switzerland
3. Japan
4. Poland
5. China


--- PAGE 242 ---
226
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Leading Import Sources
1. United States
2. Japan
3. China
4. Switzerland
5. Russia
The EMU is primarily a service-oriented economy. Services in 2001
accounted for approximately 70 percent of GDP, while manufacturing,
mining, and utilities accounted for only 22 percent of GDP. In fact, a large
number of the companies whose primary purpose is to produce ﬁnished
products still concentrate their EU activity on innovation, research, design,
and marketing, while outsourcing most of their manufacturing activities
to Asia.
The EU’s growing role in international trade has important implica-
tions for the role of the euro as a reserve currency. It is important for coun-
tries to have large amounts of reserve currencies to reduce exchange risk
and transaction costs. Traditionally, most international trade transactions
involve the British pound, the Japanese yen, and/or the U.S. dollar. Before
the establishment of the euro, it was unreasonable to hold large amounts
of every individual European national currency. As a result, currency re-
serves tended toward the dollar. At the end of the 1990s, approximately
65 percent of all world reserves were held in U.S. dollars, but with the in-
troduction of the euro, foreign reserve assets are shifting in favor of the
euro. This trend is expected to continue as the EU becomes one of the
major trading partners for most countries around the world.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—The
European Central Bank
The European Central Bank (ECB) is the governing body responsible for
determining the monetary policy of the countries participating in the EMU.
The executive board of the EMU consists of the president of the ECB, the
vice president of the ECB, and four other members. These individuals along
with the governors of the national central banks comprise the Governing
Council. The ECB is set up so that the executive board implements the
policies dictated by the Governing Council. New monetary policy decisions
are typically made by majority vote, with the president having the deciding
vote in the event of a tie, in biweekly meetings. Although the ECB meets
on a biweekly basis and has the power to change monetary policy at each
of those meetings, it is only expected to do so at meetings where an ofﬁcial
press conference is scheduled afterward.


--- PAGE 243 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
227
The EMU’s primary objective is to maintain price stability and to pro-
mote growth. Monetary and ﬁscal policy changes are made to ensure that
this objective is met. With the formation of the EMU, the Maastricht Treaty
was developed by the EU to apply a number of criteria for each member
country to help the EU achieve its objective. Deviations from these criteria
by any one country will result in heavy ﬁnes. It is apparent, based on these
criteria, that the ECB has a strict mandate focused on inﬂation and deﬁcit.
Generally, the ECB strives to maintain annual growth in Harmonized In-
dex of Consumer Prices (HICP) below 2 percent and M3 (money supply)
annual growth around 4.5 percent.
The EMU Criteria
In the 1992 Treaty on European Union (the Maas-
tricht Treaty) the following criteria were formulated as preconditions for
any EU member state joining the European Monetary Union (EMU).
r A rate of inﬂation no more than 1.5 percent above the average of
the three best-performing member states, taking the average of the
12-month year-on-year rate preceding the assessment date.
r Long-term interest rates not exceeding the average rates of these low-
inﬂation states by more than 2 percent for the preceding 12 months.
r Exchange rates that ﬂuctuate within the normal margins of the
exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) for at least two years.
r A general government debt/GDP ratio of not more than 60 percent, al-
though a higher ratio may be permissible if it is “sufﬁciently diminish-
ing.”
r A general government deﬁcit not exceeding 3 percent of GDP, although
a small and temporary excess can be permitted.
The ECB and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) are
independent institutions from both national governments and other EU
institutions, granting them complete control over monetary policy. This
operational independence is accorded to them as per Article 108 of the
Maastricht Treaty, which states that any member of the decision-making
bodies cannot seek or take instructions from any community institutions,
any government of a member state, or any other body. The primary tools
the ECB uses to control monetary policy are:
Open Market Operations
The ECB has four main categories of open
market operations to steer interest rates, manage liquidity, and signal mon-
etary policy stance.
1. Main reﬁnancing operations. These are regular liquidity-providing re-
verse transactions conducted weekly with a maturity of two weeks,
which provide the bulk of reﬁnancing to the ﬁnancial sector.


--- PAGE 244 ---
228
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
2. Longer-term reﬁnancing operations. These are liquidity-providing re-
verse transactions with a monthly frequency and a maturity of three
months, which provide counterparties with additional longer-term
reﬁnancing.
3. Fine-tuning operations. These are executed on an ad hoc basis with
the aim of both managing the liquidity situation in the market and steer-
ing interest rates, in particular in order to smooth the effects on inter-
est rates caused by unexpected liquidity ﬂuctuations.
4. Structural operations. These involve the issuance of debt certiﬁcates,
reverse transactions, and outright transactions. These operations will
be executed whenever the ECB wishes to adjust the structural posi-
tion of the Eurosystem vis-`a-vis the ﬁnancial sector (on a regular or
nonregular basis).
ECB Minimum Bid Rate (Repo Rate)
The ECB minimum bid rate
is the key policy target for the ECB. It is the level of borrowing that the
ECB offers to the central banks of its member states. This is also the rate
that is subject to change at the biweekly ECB meetings. Since inﬂation is of
high concern to the ECB, it is more inclined to keep interest rates at lofty
levels to prevent inﬂation. Changes in the ECB’s minimum bid rate have
large ramiﬁcations for the euro.
The ECB does not have an exchange rate target, but will factor in ex-
change rates in its policy deliberations, as exchange rates impact price sta-
bility. Therefore, the ECB is not prevented from intervening in the foreign
exchange markets if it believes that inﬂation is a concern. As a result, com-
ments by members of the Governing Council are widely watched by FX
market participants and frequently move the euro.
The ECB publishes a monthly bulletin detailing analysis of economic
developments and changes to its perceptions of economic conditions; it is
important to follow the bulletin for signals to changes in the bias of mone-
tary policy.
Important Characteristics of the Euro
r The EUR/USD cross is the most liquid currency; all major euro
crosses are very liquid.
The euro was introduced as an electronic currency on January 1,
1999. At this time, the euro replaced all pre-EMU currencies, except
for Greece’s currency, which was converted to the euro in January
2001. As a result, the EUR/USD cross is now the most liquid currency
in the world and its movements are used as the primary gauge of the
health of both the European and U.S. economies. The euro is most


--- PAGE 245 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
229
frequently known as the “anti-dollar” since it is dollar fundamentals
that have dictated the currency pair’s movements between 2003 and
2008. (See Figure 12.2.)
EUR/JPY and EUR/CHF are also very liquid currencies that are
generally used as gauges to the health of the Japanese and Swiss
economies. The EUR/USD and EUR/GBP crosses are great trading
currencies, as they have tight spreads, make orderly moves, and rarely
gap.
r The euro has unique risks.
Having been launched in 1999, the euro is still a relatively new
currency. There are a number of factors that need to be considered
as risks to the euro that may never be problems for other currencies:
namely, the exposure to the economic, political, and social develop-
ments of 15 member countries. Although the number of countries using
the euro is expected to grow, if any countries start dropping the euro
and reverting back to their original currency because they do not be-
lieve that the ECB’s actions are in their best interest, it could affect the
stability of the entire region. The euro is the only currency in the world
without a country. Even though Germany, France, Italy, and Spain
are the largest and most economically dominant countries within the
Eurozone, the European Central Bank has the power and the respon-
sibility to determine monetary policy for all 15 of its member coun-
tries. With that comes the political pressure of 15 governments that
frequently test and criticize the actions of the European Central Bank.
FIGURE 12.2
EUR/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 246 ---
230
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Up until the subprime crisis, the ECB was a new and untested central
bank. However, its rapid response to the credit crunch and its deep
liquidity injections have transformed its reputation.
r The spread between 10-year U.S. Treasuries and 10-year
bunds can indicate euro sentiment.
The 10-year government bonds serve as an important indicator of
future euro exchange rates, especially against the U.S. dollar. The dif-
ferential between the 10-year U.S. government bond and the 10-year
German bund rates can provide a good indication for euro movement.
If bund rates are higher than Treasury rates and the differential in-
creases or the spread widens, this implies euro bullishness. A decrease
in the differential or spread tightening tends to be bearish for the euro.
The 10-year German bund is typically used as the benchmark bond for
the Eurozone.
r Predictions for euro area money ﬂows.
Another useful interest rate is the three-month interest rate, also
known as the euro interbank offer rate (Euribor rate). This is the rate
offered from one large bank to another on interbank term deposits.
Traders tend to compare the Euribor futures rate with the Eurodol-
lar futures rate. Eurodollars are deposits denominated in U.S. dollars
at banks and other ﬁnancial institutions outside the United States. Be-
cause investors like high-yielding assets, European ﬁxed income as-
sets become more attractive as the spread between Euribor futures
and Eurodollar futures widens in favor of the Euribors. As the spread
narrows, European assets become less attractive, thereby implying a
potential decrease in money ﬂows into the euro.
Merger and acquisition activity also has important implications for
EUR/USD movements. Recent years have seen increased M&A activity
between EU and U.S. multinationals. Large deals, especially if in cash,
often have signiﬁcant short-term impacts on the EUR/USD.
Important Indicators for the Euro
All of the following economic indicators are important for the euro. How-
ever, since the EMU consists of 12 countries, it is important to keep abreast
of political and economic developments such as GDP growth, inﬂation, and
unemployment for all member countries. The largest countries within the
EMU are Germany, France, and Italy. Therefore, in addition to the overall
EMU economic data, the economic data of these three countries are the
most important.
Preliminary GDP
Preliminary GDP is issued when Eurostat has col-
lected data from a sufﬁcient number of countries to produce an estimate.


--- PAGE 247 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
231
This usually includes France, Germany, and the Netherlands. However,
Italy is not included in the preliminary release and is only added in the
ﬁnal number. The yearly aggregates for EU-15 and EMU-11 are a simple
sum of national GDP. For the quarterly accounts, the aggregation is more
complex since some countries (Greece, Ireland, and Luxembourg) do not
yet produce quarterly national accounts data. Moreover, Portugal produces
only partial quarterly accounts with a signiﬁcant lag. Thus, both the EU-15
and EMU-11 quarterly paths are the result of estimates from quarterly data
based on a group of countries accounting for more than 95 percent of total
EU GDP.
German Industrial Production
The industrial production data is
seasonally adjusted and includes a breakdown into four major subcate-
gories: mining, manufacturing, energy, and construction. The manufactur-
ing aggregate comprises four main product groups: basic and producer
goods, capital goods, consumer durables, and consumer nondurables. The
market tends to pay attention to the annual rate of change and the season-
ally adjusted month-on-month ﬁgure. Germany’s ﬁgure is most important
since it is the largest country in the Eurozone; however, the market also
occasionally reacts based on French industrial production. The initial in-
dustrial production release is based on a narrower data sample and hence
subject to revision when the full sample has become available. The Finance
Ministry occasionally indicates the expected direction of the revision in the
initial data release.
Inﬂation Indicators
Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices
The EU Harmonized Index
of Consumer Prices (HICP) published by Eurostat is designed for interna-
tional comparison as required by EU law. Eurostat has published the index
since January 1995. Since January 1998, Eurostat has published a speciﬁc
index for the EMU-11 area called MUICP. Information on prices is retrieved
by each national statistical agency. They are required to provide Eurostat
with the 100 indexes used to compute the HICP. The national HICPs are to-
taled by Eurostat as a weighted average of these subindexes. The weights
used are country speciﬁc. The HICP is released at the end of the month fol-
lowing the reference period, which is about 10 days after the publications
of the national CPIs from Spain and France, the ﬁnal EMU-5 countries to
release their CPIs. Even if the information is already partly in the market
when the HICP is released, it is an important release because it serves as
the reference inﬂation index for the ECB. The ECB aims to keep Euroland
consumer price inﬂation in a range of 0 to 2 percent.


--- PAGE 248 ---
232
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
M3
M3 is a broad measure of money supply, which includes everything
from notes and coins to bank deposits. The ECB closely monitors M3, as it
is viewed as a key measure of inﬂation. At its session in December 1998, the
Governing Council of the ECB set its ﬁrst reference value for M3 growth at
4.5 percent. This value supports inﬂation below 2 percent, trend growth of
2 to 2.5 percent, and a long-term decline in the velocity of money by 0.5 to
1 percent. The growth rate is monitored on a three-month moving average
basis in order to prevent monthly volatility from distorting the information
given by the aggregate. The ECB’s approach to monetary targeting leaves
considerable room for maneuver and interpretation. Because the ECB does
not impose bands on M3 growth, as the Bundesbank used to do, there will
be no automatic action when M3 growth diverges from the reference value.
Moreover, although the ECB considers M3 to be the key indicator, it will
also take into account the changes in other monetary aggregates.
German Unemployment
The release by the Labor Ofﬁce contains in-
formation on the number of unemployed, as well as the changes on the
previous month, in both seasonally adjusted (SA) and nonseasonally ad-
justed (NSA) terms. The NSA unemployment rate is provided, along with
data on vacancies, short-shift working arrangements, and the number of
employees (temporarily suspended in 1999). Within an hour after the Fed-
eral Labor Ofﬁce (FLO) release, the Bundesbank releases the SA unemploy-
ment rate. The day ahead of the release, there is often a leak of the ofﬁcial
data from a trade union source. The leak is usually of the NSA level of un-
employment in millions. When a precise ﬁgure is reported on Reuters as
given by “sources” for the NSA level of unemployment, the leak usually re-
ﬂects the ofﬁcial ﬁgures. Rumors often circulate up to one week before the
ofﬁcial release, but these are notoriously imprecise. Moreover, comments
by German ofﬁcials have in the past been mistranslated by the interna-
tional press, so care needs to be exercised in interpreting news reports of
rumors.
Individual Country Budget Deﬁcits
The Stability and Growth Pact
states that deﬁcits must be kept below 3 percent of GDP. Countries also
have targets set to further reduce their deﬁcits. Failure to meet these tar-
gets is widely watched by market participants.
IFO (Information and Forschung [research]) Survey
Germany is
by far the largest economy in Europe and is responsible for over 30 percent
of total GDP. Any insight into German business conditions is seen as an in-
sight into Europe as a whole. The IFO is a monthly survey conducted by the
IFO institute in which over 7,000 German ﬁrms are asked for their assess-
ment of the German business climate and their short-term plans. The initial


--- PAGE 249 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
233
publication of the results consists of the business climate headline ﬁgure
and its two equally weighted subindexes: current business conditions and
business expectations. The typical range is from 80 to 120, with a higher
number indicating greater business conﬁdence. The measure is most valu-
able, however, when measured against previous data.
CURRENCY PROFILE: BRITISH
POUND (GBP)
Broad Economic Overview
The United Kingdom is the world’s fourth largest economy with GDP val-
ued at approximately US$2 trillion in 2006. With one of the most effective
central banks in the world, the U.K. economy has beneﬁted from many
years of strong growth, low unemployment, expanding output, and resilient
consumption. The strength of consumer consumption has in large part
been due the country’s strong housing market, which peaked in 2003. The
United Kingdom has a service-oriented economy, with manufacturing rep-
resenting an increasingly smaller portion of GDP, now equivalent to only
one-ﬁfth of national output. The capital market systems are one of the most
developed in the world, and as a result ﬁnance and banking have become
the strongest contributors to GDP. Although the majority of the United
Kingdom’s GDP is from services, it is important to know that it is also one
of the largest producers and exporters of natural gas in the EU. The energy
production industry accounts for 10 percent of GDP, which is one of the
highest shares of any industrialized nation. This is particularly important,
as increases in energy prices (such as oil) will signiﬁcantly beneﬁt the large
number of U.K. oil exporters. (The United Kingdom did become a net oil
importer for a brief period due to disruptions in the North Sea in 2003, but
has already resumed its status as a net oil exporter.)
Overall, the United Kingdom is a net importer of goods with a consis-
tent trade deﬁcit. Its largest trading partner is the EU, with trade between
the two constituencies accounting for over 50 percent of all of the country’s
import and export activities. The United States, on an individual basis, still
remains the United Kingdom’s largest trading partner. The breakdowns of
the most important trading partners for the United Kingdom are:
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. France
3. Germany


--- PAGE 250 ---
234
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
4. Ireland
5. Netherlands
Leading Import Sources
1. Germany
2. France
3. United States
4. Netherlands
5. Belgium
Although the United Kingdom rejected adopting the euro in June 2003,
the possibility of euro adoption will still be a factor in the backs of the
minds of pound traders for many years to come. If the United Kingdom de-
cided to join the EMU, doing so would have signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations for
its economy, the most important of which is that U.K. interest rates would
have to be adjusted to reﬂect the equivalent interest rate of the Eurozone.
One of the primary arguments against joining the EMU is that the U.K. gov-
ernment has sound macroeconomic policies that have worked very well for
the country. Its successful monetary and ﬁscal policies have led the United
Kingdom to outperform most major economies through a recent economic
downturn, including the EU.
The U.K. Treasury has previously speciﬁed ﬁve economic tests that
must be met prior to euro adoption.
United Kingdom’s Five Economic Tests for the Euro
1. Is there sustainable convergence in business cycles and economic
structures between the United Kingdom and other EMU members, so
that the U.K. citizens could live comfortably with euro interest rates on
a permanent basis?
2. Is there enough ﬂexibility to cope with economic change?
3. Would joining the EMU create an environment that would encourage
ﬁrms to invest in the United Kingdom?
4. Would joining the EMU have a positive impact on the competitiveness
of the United Kingdom’s ﬁnancial services industry?
5. Would joining the EMU be good for promoting stability and growth in
employment?
The United Kingdom is a very political country where government of-
ﬁcials are highly concerned with voter approval. If voters do not support


--- PAGE 251 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
235
euro entry, the likelihood of EMU entry would decline. The following are
some of the arguments for and against adopting the euro.
Arguments in Favor of Adopting the Euro
r Reduced exchange rate uncertainty for U.K. businesses and lower ex-
change rate transaction costs or risks.
r The prospect of sustained low inﬂation under the governance of the
European Central Bank should reduce long-term interest rates and
stimulate sustained economic growth.
r Single currency promotes price transparency.
r The integration of national ﬁnancial markets of the EU will lead to
higher efﬁciency in the allocation of capital in Europe.
r The euro is the second most important reserve currency after the U.S.
dollar.
r With the United Kingdom joining the EMU, the political clout of the
EMU would increase dramatically.
Arguments against Adopting the Euro
r Currency unions have collapsed in the past.
r Economic or political instabilities of one country would impact the
euro, which would have exchange rate ramiﬁcations for otherwise
healthy countries.
r Strict EMU criteria are outlined by the Stability and Growth Pact.
r Entry would mean a permanent transfer of domestic monetary author-
ity to the European Central Bank.
r Joining a currency union with no monetary ﬂexibility would require
the United Kingdom to have more ﬂexibility in the labor and housing
markets.
r There are fears about which countries might dominate the ECB.
r Adjusting to new currency will require large transaction costs.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Bank
of England
The Bank of England (BOE) is the United Kingdom’s central bank. The
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is a nine-member committee that sets
monetary policy for the United Kingdom. It consists of a governor, two
deputy governors, two executive directors of the central bank, and four
outside experts. The committee was granted operational independence in
setting monetary policy in 1997. Despite this independence, their mone-
tary policies are centered around achieving an inﬂation target dictated by
the Treasury Chancellor. Currently, this target is retail price index (RPIX)


--- PAGE 252 ---
236
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
inﬂation of 2.5 percent. The central bank has the power to change inter-
est rates to levels that it believes will allow it to meet this target. The MPC
holds monthly meetings, which are closely followed for announcements on
changes in monetary policy, including changes in the interest rate (bank
repo rate).
The MPC publishes statements after every meeting, along with a quar-
terly Inﬂation Report detailing the MPC’s forecasts for the next two years
of growth and inﬂation and justiﬁcation for its policy movements. In ad-
dition, another publication, the Quarterly Bulletin, provides information
on past monetary policy movements and analysis of the international eco-
nomic environment and its impacts on the U.K. economy. All of these re-
ports contain detailed information on the MPC’s policies and biases for
future policy movements. The main policy tools used by the MPC and BOE
follow.
Bank Repo Rate
This is the key rate used in monetary policy to meet
the Treasury’s inﬂation target. This rate is set for the bank’s own operations
in the market, such as the short-term lending activities. Changes to this rate
affect the rates set by the commercial banks for their savers and borrow-
ers. In turn, this rate will affect spending and output in the economy, and
eventually costs and prices. An increase in this rate would imply an attempt
to curb inﬂation, while a decrease in this rate would be to stimulate growth
and expansion.
Open Market Operations
The goal of open market operations is to
implement the changes in the bank repo rate, while assuring adequate liq-
uidity in the market and continued stability in the banking system. This is
reﬂective of the three main objectives of the BOE: maintaining the integrity
and value of the currency, maintaining the stability of the ﬁnancial system,
and seeking to ensure the effectiveness of the United Kingdom’s ﬁnancial
services. To ensure liquidity, the bank conducts daily open market oper-
ations to buy or sell short-term government ﬁxed income instruments. If
this is not sufﬁcient to meet liquidity needs, the BOE would also conduct
additional overnight operations.
Important Characteristics of the British Pound
r GBP/USD is very liquid.
The GBP/USD is one of the most liquid currencies in the world,
with 6 percent of all currency trading involving the British pound as
either the base or counter currency. It is also one of the four most liq-
uid currencies available for trading (among the EUR/USD, GBP/USD,
USD/JPY, and USD/CHF). One of the reasons for the currency’s


--- PAGE 253 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
237
liquidity is the country’s highly developed capital markets. Many for-
eign investors seeking opportunities other than the United States have
sent their funds to the United Kingdom. In order to create these invest-
ments, foreigners will need to sell their local currency and buy British
pounds. (See Figure 12.3.)
r GBP has three names.
The U.K.’s currency has three names—the British pound, Sterling,
and Cable. All of these are interchangeable.
r GBP is laden with speculators.
At the time of publication, the British pound has one of the high-
est interest rates among the developed nations. Although Australia and
New Zealand have higher interest rates, their ﬁnancial markets are not
as developed as that of the United Kingdom. As a result, many investors
who already have positions or are interested in initiating new carry
trade positions frequently use the GBP as the lending currency and will
go long the pound against currencies such as the U.S. dollar, Japanese
yen, and Swiss franc. A carry trade involves buying or lending a cur-
rency with a higher interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency
with a lower interest rate. In recent years, carry trades have increased
in popularity, which has helped spur demand for the British pound.
However, should the interest rate yield differential between the pound
and other currencies narrow, an exodus of carry traders will increase
volatility in the British pound.
FIGURE 12.3
GBP/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 254 ---
238
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
r Interest rate differentials between gilts and foreign bonds are
closely followed.
Interest rate differentials between U.K. gilts/U.S. Treasuries and
U.K. gilts/German bunds are widely watched by FX market partici-
pants. Gilts versus Treasuries can be a barometer of GBP/USD ﬂows,
while gilts versus bunds can be used as a barometer for EUR/GBP
ﬂows. More speciﬁcally, these interest rate differentials indicate how
much premium yield U.K. ﬁxed income assets are offering over U.S.
and European ﬁxed income assets (the German bund is usually used
as a barometer for European yield), or vice versa. This differential
provides traders with indications of potential capital ﬂow or currency
movements, as global investors are always shifting their capital in
search for the assets with the highest yields. The United Kingdom cur-
rently provides these yields, while also providing the safety of having
the same credit stability as the United States.
r Eurosterling
futures
can
give
indications
for
interest
rate movements.
Since the U.K. interest rate or bank repo rate is the primary tool
used in monetary policy, it is important to keep abreast of potential
changes to the interest rate. Comments from government ofﬁcials is
one way to gauge biases for potential rate changes, but the Bank of
England is one of the few central banks that require members of the
Monetary Policy Committee to publish their voting records. This per-
sonal accountability indicates that comments by individual committee
members represent their own opinions and not that of the BOE. There-
fore, it is necessary to look for other indications of potential BOE rate
movements. Three-month eurosterling futures reﬂect market expecta-
tions on eurosterling interest rates three months into the future. These
contracts are also useful in predicting U.K. interest rate changes, which
will ultimately affect the ﬂuctuations of the GBP/USD.
r Comments on euro by U.K. politicians will impact the euro.
Any speeches, remarks (especially from the prime minister or
Treasury chancellor), or polls in regard to the euro will impact the cur-
rency markets. Indication for adoption of the euro tends to put down-
ward pressure on the GBP, while further opposition to euro entry will
typically boost the GBP, the reason being that in order for the GBP to
come in line with the euro, interest rates would have to decrease sig-
niﬁcantly (at the time of this writing, the United Kingdom interest rate
is 5.00 percent, versus euro interest rate of 4.00 percent). A decrease
in the interest rate would induce carry trade investors to close their
positions, or sell pounds. The GBP/USD would also decline because
of the uncertainties involved with euro adoption. The U.K. economy
is performing very well under the direction of its current monetary


--- PAGE 255 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
239
authority. The EMU is currently encountering many difﬁculties with
member countries breaching EMU criteria. With one monetary author-
ity dictating 12 countries (plus the United Kingdom would be 13), the
EMU has yet to prove that it has developed a monetary policy suitable
for all member states.
r GBP has positive correlation with energy prices.
The United Kingdom houses some of the largest energy companies
in the world, including British Petroleum. Energy production repre-
sents 10 percent of GDP. As a result, the British pound tends to have a
positive correlation with energy prices. Speciﬁcally, since many mem-
bers of the EU import oil from the United Kingdom, as oil prices in-
crease, they will in turn have to buy more pounds to fund their energy
purchases. In addition, higher oil prices will also beneﬁt the earnings
of the nation’s energy exporters.
r GBP crosses.
Although the GBP/USD is a more liquid currency than EUR/GBP,
EUR/GBP is typically the leading gauge for GBP strength. The
GBP/USD currency pair tends to be more sensitive to U.S. develop-
ments, while EUR/GBP is a more pure fundamental pound trade since
EUR is Britain’s primary trade and investment partner. However, both
currencies are naturally interdependent, which means that movements
in the EUR/GBP cross can ﬁlter into movements in the GBP/USD. The
reverse is also true; that is, movements in GBP/USD will also affect
trading in EUR/GBP. Therefore it is important for pound traders to be
consciously aware of the trading behavior of both currency pairs. The
EUR/GBP rate should be exactly equal to the EUR/USD divided by the
GBP/USD rate. Small differences in these rates are often exploited by
market participants and quickly eliminated.
Important Economic Indicators for the
United Kingdom
All of the following indicators are important for the United Kingdom. How-
ever, since the United Kingdom is primarily a service-oriented economy,
it is particularly important to pay attention to numbers from the service
sector.
Employment Situation
A monthly survey is conducted by the Of-
ﬁce of National Statistics. The objectives of the survey are to divide the
working-age population into three separate classiﬁcations—employed, un-
employed, and not in the labor force—and to provide descriptive and ex-
planatory data on each of these categories. Data from the survey provides
market participants with information on major labor market trends such as


--- PAGE 256 ---
240
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
shifts in employment across industrial sectors, hours worked, labor force
participation, and unemployment rates. The timeliness of the survey makes
it a closely watched statistic by the currency markets as it is a good barom-
eter of the strength of the U.K. economy.
Retail Price Index
The RPI is a measure of the change in prices of a
basket of consumer goods. The markets, however, focus on the underlying
RPI or RPI-X, which excludes mortgage interest payments. The RPI-X is
closely watched as the Treasury sets inﬂation targets for the BOE, currently
deﬁned as 2.5 percent annual growth in RPI-X.
Gross Domestic Product
A quarterly report is conducted by the Bu-
reau of Statistics. GDP is a measure of the total production and consump-
tion of goods and services in the United Kingdom. GDP is measured by
adding expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net for-
eign purchases. The GDP price deﬂator is used to convert output measured
at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is used to gauge where
in the business cycle the United Kingdom ﬁnds itself. Fast growth often is
perceived as inﬂationary while low (or negative) growth indicates a reces-
sionary or weak economy.
Industrial Production
The industrial production (IP) index measures
the change in output in U.K. manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and
electricity, gas, and water supply. Output refers to the physical quantity
of items produced, unlike sales value, which combines quantity and price.
The index covers the production of goods and power for domestic sales
in the United Kingdom and for export. Because IP is responsible for close
to a quarter of gross domestic product, IP is widely watched as it provides
good insight into the current state of the economy.
Purchasing Managers Index
The purchasing managers index (PMI)
is a monthly survey conducted by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing
and Supply. The index is based on a weighted average of seasonally ad-
justed measures of output, new orders, inventory, and employment. Index
values above 50 indicate an expanding economy, while values below 50 are
indicative of contraction.
U.K. Housing Starts
Housing starts measure the number of resi-
dential building construction projects that have begun during any
particular month. This is important data for the United Kingdom as the
housing market is the primary industry that is sustaining the economy’s
performance.


--- PAGE 257 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
241
CURRENCY PROFILE: SWISS
FRANC (CHF)
Broad Economic Overview
Switzerland is the nineteenth largest economy in the world, with a GDP
valued at over US$255 billion in 2006. Although the economy is relatively
small, it is one of the wealthiest in the world on a GDP per capita basis. It
is prosperous and technologically advanced with stability that rivals that
of many larger economies. The country’s prosperity stems primarily from
technological expertise in manufacturing, tourism, and banking. More
speciﬁcally, Switzerland is known for its chemicals and pharmaceuticals
industries, machinery, precision instruments, watches, and a ﬁnancial sys-
tem historically known for protecting the conﬁdentiality of its investors.
This coupled with the country’s lengthy history of political neutrality has
created a safe haven reputation for the country and its currency. As a
result, Switzerland is the world’s largest destination for offshore capital.
The country holds over US$2 trillion in offshore assets and is estimated
to attract more than 35 percent of the world’s private wealth management
business. This has created a large and highly advanced banking and
insurance industry that employs over 50 percent of the population and
comprises more than 70 percent of total GDP. Since Switzerland’s ﬁnancial
industry thrives on its safe haven status and renowned conﬁdentiality, cap-
ital ﬂows tend to drive the economy during times of global risk aversion,
while trade ﬂows drive the economy during a risk-seeking environment.
Therefore trade ﬂows are important, with nearly two-thirds of all trade
conducted with Europe. Switzerland’s most important trading partners are:
Leading Export Markets
1. Germany
2. United States
3. Italy
4. France
5. United Kingdom
6. Japan
Leading Import Sources
1. Germany
2. Italy
3. France


--- PAGE 258 ---
242
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
4. Netherlands
5. United States
6. United Kingdom
In recent years, merchandise trade ﬂow has ﬂuctuated between deﬁcit
and surplus. The current account, on the other hand, has reﬂected a surplus
since 1966. In 2006, the current account surplus reached a high at 14.5 per-
cent of GDP. This is the highest current account surplus among all of the
industrialized countries (aside from Norway, Singapore, and Hong Kong).
Most of the surplus can be attributed to the large amount of foreign direct
investment into the country in search of safety of capital, despite the low
yields offered by Switzerland.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Swiss
National Bank
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is the central bank of Switzerland. It is
a completely independent central bank with a three-person committee re-
sponsible for determining monetary policy. This committee consists of a
chairman, a vice chairman, and one other member who constitute the Gov-
erning Board of the SNB. Due to the small size of the committee, all deci-
sions are based on a consensus vote. The board reviews monetary policy
at least once a quarter, but decisions on monetary policy can be made and
announced at any point in time. Unlike most other central banks, the SNB
does not set one ofﬁcial interest rate target, but instead sets a target range
for the three-month Swiss LIBOR rate.
Central Bank’s Goals
In December 1999, the SNB shifted from fo-
cusing on monetary targets (M3) to an inﬂation target of less than 2 per-
cent inﬂation per year. This measure is taken based on the national con-
sumer price index. Monetary targets still remain important indicators and
are closely watched by the central bank, because they provide informa-
tion on the long-term inﬂation. This new inﬂation focus also increases the
central bank’s transparency. The bank has clearly stated that “should in-
ﬂation exceed 2 percent in the medium term, the SNB will tend to tighten
its monetary stance.” If there is a danger of deﬂation, the National Bank
would loosen monetary policy. The SNB also closely monitors exchange
rates, as excessive strength in the Swiss franc can cause inﬂationary con-
ditions. This is especially true in environments of global risk aversion, as
capital ﬂows into Switzerland increase signiﬁcantly during those times. As
a result, the SNB typically favors a weak franc, and is not hesitant to use
intervention as a liquidity tool. SNB ofﬁcials intervene in the franc using


--- PAGE 259 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
243
a variety of methods including verbal remarks on liquidity, money supply,
and the currency.
Central Bank’s Tools
The most commonly used tools by the SNB to
implement monetary policy include:
Target Interest Rate Range
The SNB implements monetary policy
by setting a target range for their three-month interest rate (the Swiss
LIBOR rate). This range typically has a 100-basis-point spread, and is re-
vised at least once every quarter. This rate is used as the target because
it is the most important money market rate for Swiss franc investments.
Changes to this target are accompanied with a clear explanation in regard
to the changes in the economic environment.
Open Market Operations
Repo transactions are the SNB’s major
monetary policy instrument. A repo transaction involves a cash taker (bor-
rower) selling securities to a cash provider (lender), while agreeing to re-
purchase the securities of the same type and quantity at a later date. This
structure is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker must pay
the cash provider interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short
maturities ranging from one day to a few weeks. The SNB uses these repo
transactions to manipulate undesirable moves in the three-month LIBOR
rate. To prevent increases in the three-month LIBOR rate above the SNB’s
target, the bank would supply the commercial banks with additional liq-
uidity through repo transactions at lower repo rates, and in essence create
additional liquidity. Conversely, the SNB can reduce liquidity or induce in-
creases in the three-month LIBOR rate by increasing repo rates.
The SNB publishes a Quarterly Bulletin with a detailed assessment
of the current state of the economy and a review of monetary policy. A
Monthly Bulletin is also published containing a short review of economic
developments. These reports are important to watch, as they may contain
information on changes in the SNB’s assessment of the current domestic
situation.
Important Characteristics of the Swiss Franc
r Safe haven status.
This is perhaps the most unique characteristic of the Swiss franc.
Switzerland’s safe haven status is continually stressed because this and
the secrecy of the banking system are the key advantages of Switzer-
land. The Swiss franc moves primarily on external events rather than
domestic economic conditions. That is, as mentioned earlier, due to
its political neutrality, the franc is considered the world’s premier


--- PAGE 260 ---
244
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
safe haven currency. Therefore, in times of global instability and/or
uncertainty, investors tend to be more concerned with capital reten-
tion than appreciation. At such times, funds will ﬂow into Switzerland,
which would cause the Swiss franc to appreciate regardless of whether
growth conditions are favorable.
r Swiss franc is closely correlated with gold.
Switzerland is the world’s fourth largest ofﬁcial holder of gold.
The Swiss constitution used to have a mandate requiring the cur-
rency to be backed 40 percent with gold reserves. Since then, de-
spite the removal of the mandate, the link between gold and the Swiss
franc has remained ingrained in the minds of Swiss investors. As a
result, the Swiss franc has close to an 80 percent positive correla-
tion with gold. If the gold price appreciates, the Swiss franc has a
high likelihood of appreciating as well. In addition, since gold is also
viewed as the ultimate safe haven form of money, both gold and the
Swiss franc beneﬁt during periods of global economic and geopolitical
uncertainty.
r Carry trades effects.
With one of the lowest interest rates in the industrialized world
over the past few years, the Swiss franc is one of the most popular cur-
rencies used by traders in carry trades. As mentioned throughout this
book, the popularity of carry trades has increased signiﬁcantly over
recent years, as investors are actively seeking high-yielding assets. A
carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a high inter-
est rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low interest rate.
With CHF having one of the lowest interest rates of all industrialized
countries, it is one of the primary currencies sold or borrowed in carry
trades. This results in the need to sell CHF against a higher-yielding
currency. Carry trades are typically done in cross-currencies such as
GBP/CHF or AUD/CHF, but these trades will impact both EUR/CHF
and USD/CHF. Unwinding of carry trades will involve the need for in-
vestors to purchase CHF.
r Interest rate differentials between Euro Swiss futures and for-
eign interest rate futures are closely followed.
Interest rate differentials between three-month Euro Swiss fu-
tures and Eurodollar futures are widely watched by professional Swiss
traders. These differentials are good indicators of potential money
ﬂows as they indicate how much premium yield U.S. ﬁxed income
assets are offering over Swiss ﬁxed income assets, or vice versa. This
differential provides traders with indications of potential currency
movements, as investors are always looking for assets with the high-
est yields. This is particularly important to carry traders who enter and


--- PAGE 261 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
245
exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differentials be-
tween global ﬁxed income assets.
r Potential changes in banking regulations.
Over the past few years members of the European Union have
been exerting signiﬁcant pressure on Switzerland to relax the conﬁ-
dentiality of its banking system and to increase transparency of cus-
tomers’ accounts. The EU is pressing this issue because of its active
measures to prosecute EU tax evaders. This should be a concern for
many years to come. However, this is a difﬁcult decision for Switzer-
land to make because the conﬁdentiality of customers’ accounts repre-
sents the core strength of its banking system. The EU has threatened
to impose severe sanctions on Switzerland if it does not comply with
the proposed measures. Both political entities are currently working to
negotiate an equitable resolution. Any news or talk of changing bank-
ing regulations will impact both Switzerland’s economy and the Swiss
franc.
r Merger and acquisition activity.
Switzerland’s primary industry is banking and ﬁnance. In this in-
dustry, merger and acquisition (M&A) activities are very common, es-
pecially as consolidation continues in the overall industry. As a result,
these M&A activities can have signiﬁcant impact on the Swiss franc. If
foreign ﬁrms purchase Swiss banks or insurance companies, they will
need to buy Swiss francs and in turn sell their local currencies. If Swiss
banks purchase foreign ﬁrms, on the other hand, they would need to
sell Swiss francs and buy the foreign currencies. Either way, it is im-
portant for Swiss franc traders to frequently watch for notices on M&A
activity involving Swiss ﬁrms.
r Trading behavior, cross-currency characteristics.
The EUR/CHF is the most commonly traded currency for traders
who want to participate in CHF movements. (See Figure 12.4.) The
USD/CHF is less frequently traded because of its higher illiquidity
and volatility. However, day traders may tend to favor USD/CHF
over EUR/CHF because of its volatile movements. In actuality, the
USD/CHF is only a synthetic currency derived from EUR/USD and
EUR/CHF. Market makers or professional traders tend to use those
pairs as leading indicators for trading USD/CHF or to price the cur-
rent USD/CHF level when the currency pair is illiquid. Theoretically,
the USD/CHF rate should be exactly equal to EUR/CHF divided by
EUR/USD. Only during times of severe global risk aversion, such as
the Iraq War or September 11, will USD/CHF develop a market of its
own. Any small differences in these rates are quickly exploited by mar-
ket participants.


--- PAGE 262 ---
246
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
FIGURE 12.4
USD/CHF Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
Important Economic Indicators for Switzerland
KoF (Konjunkturforschungsstelle der eth, Zurich) Leading
Indicators
The KoF leading indicators report is released by the Swiss
Institute for Business Cycle Research. This index is generally used to
gauge the future health of the Swiss economy. It contains six components:
(1) change in manufacturers’ orders, (2) expected purchase plans of manu-
facturers over the next three months, (3) judgment of stocks in wholesale
business, (4) consumer perception of their ﬁnancial conditions, (5) backlog
in the construction sector, and (6) orders backlog for manufacturers.
Consumer
Price
Index
The consumer price index is calculated
monthly on the basis of retail prices paid in Switzerland. In accordance
with prevalent international practice, the commodities covered are dis-
tinguished according to the consumption concept, which includes in the
calculation of the index those goods and services that are part of the pri-
vate consumption aggregate according to the National Accounts. The bas-
ket of goods does not include so-called transfer expenditure such as direct
taxation, social insurance contributions, and health insurance premiums.
The index is a key measure of inﬂation.
Gross Domestic Product
GDP is a measure of the total production
and consumption of goods and services in Switzerland. GDP is measured
by adding expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net
foreign purchases. The GDP price deﬂator is used to convert output mea-
sured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is used to gauge


--- PAGE 263 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
247
where in the business cycle Switzerland ﬁnds itself. Fast growth often is
perceived as inﬂationary while low (or negative) growth indicates a reces-
sionary or weak economy.
Balance of Payments
Balance of payments is the collective term for
the accounts of Swiss transactions with the rest of the world. The current
account is the balance of trade plus services portion. Balance of payments
is an important indicator for Swiss traders as Switzerland has always kept
a strong current account balance. Any changes to the current account, pos-
itive or negative, could see substantial ﬂows.
Production Index (Industrial Production)
The production index
is a quarterly measure of the change in the volume of industrial production
(or physical output by producers).
Retail Sales
Switzerland’s retail sales report is released on a monthly
basis 40 days after the reference month. The data is an important indicator
of consumer spending habits and is not seasonally adjusted.
CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE
YEN (JPY)
Broad Economic Overview
Japan is the third largest economy in the world with GDP valued at over
US$4.2 trillion in 2006 (behind the United States and the entire Eurozone
or EMU). It is the second largest single economy. The country is also one
of the world’s largest exporters and is responsible for over $500 billion in
exports per year. Manufacturing and exports of products such as electron-
ics and cars are the signature drivers of the economy, accounting for nearly
20 percent of GDP. This has resulted in a consistent trade surplus, which
creates an inherent demand for the Japanese yen, despite severe structural
deﬁciencies. Aside from being an exporter, Japan is also a large importer
of raw materials for the production of goods. The primary trade partners
for Japan in terms of both imports and exports are the United States and
China. China’s inexpensive goods have helped the country capture a larger
share of Japan’s import market. It is becoming an increasingly important
trade partner, and has even surpassed the United States to become Japan’s
largest source of imports in 2003.
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. China


--- PAGE 264 ---
248
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
3. South Korea
4. Taiwan
5. Hong Kong
Leading Import Sources
1. China
2. United States
3. South Korea
4. Australia
5. Taiwan
Japan’s Bubble Burst
Understanding the Japanese economy ﬁrst involves understanding what
led to the Japanese bubble and its subsequent burst.
In the 1980s, Japan’s ﬁnancial market was one of the most attractive
markets for international investors seeking investment opportunities in
Asia. It had the most developed capital markets in the region, and its bank-
ing system was considered to be one of the strongest in the world. At the
time, the country was experiencing above-trend economic growth and near
zero inﬂation. This resulted in rapid growth expectations, boosted asset
prices, and rapid credit expansion, leading to the development of an as-
set bubble. Between 1990 and 1997, the asset bubble collapsed, inducing a
US$10 trillion fall in asset prices, with the fall in real estate prices account-
ing for nearly 65 percent of the total decline, which is worth two years of
national output. This fall in asset prices sparked a banking crisis in Japan.
It began in the early 1990s and then developed into a full-blown systemic
crisis in 1997 following the failure of a number of high-proﬁle ﬁnancial insti-
tutions. Many of these banks and ﬁnancial institutions had extended loans
to the builders and real estate developers at the height of the asset bubble
in the 1980s, with the land as the collateral. A number of these developers
defaulted after the asset bubble collapse, leaving the country’s banks sad-
dled with bad debt and collateral worth sometimes 60 to 80 percent less
than when the loans were taken out. Due to the large size of these bank-
ing institutions and their role in corporate funding, the crisis had profound
effects on both the Japanese economy and the global economy. Enormous
bad debts, falling stock prices, and a collapsing real estate sector have crip-
pled the Japanese economy for almost two decades.
In addition to the banking crisis, Japan also has the highest debt level
of all of the industrialized countries, at over 140 percent of GDP. As a
result of the country’s deteriorating ﬁscal position and rising public debt,
the country experienced over 10 years of stagnation. With this high debt


--- PAGE 265 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
249
burden, Japan still stands at risk of a liquidity crisis. The banking sector
has become highly dependent on a government bailout. As a result, the
Japanese yen is very sensitive to political developments and to any words
in speeches by government ofﬁcials that may indicate potential changes
in monetary and ﬁscal policy, attempted bailout proposals, and any other
rumors.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Bank
of Japan
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) is the key monetary policy making body in Japan.
In 1998, the Japanese government passed laws giving the BOJ operational
independence from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and complete control
over monetary policy. However, despite the government’s attempts to de-
centralize decision making, the MOF still remains in charge of foreign ex-
change policy. The BOJ is responsible for executing all ofﬁcial Japanese
foreign exchange transactions at the direction of the MOF. The Bank of
Japan’s Policy Board consists of the BOJ governor, two deputy gover-
nors, and six other members. Monetary policy meetings are held twice a
month with brieﬁngs and press releases provided immediately. The BOJ
also publishes a Monthly Report issued by the Policy Board and a Monthly
Economic Report. These reports are important to watch for changes in
BOJ sentiment and signals of new monetary or ﬁscal policy measures,
as the government is constantly trying to develop initiatives to stimulate
growth.
The MOF and the BOJ are very important institutions that both have
the ability to impact currency movements. Since the MOF is the director of
foreign exchange interventions, it is important to watch and keep abreast
of the comments made from MOF ofﬁcials. Being an export-driven econ-
omy, the government tends to favor a weaker Japanese yen. Therefore, if
the Japanese yen appreciates signiﬁcantly or too rapidly against the dol-
lar, members of the BOJ and MOF will become increasingly vocal about
their concerns or disapproval in regard to the current level or movements
in the Japanese yen. These comments do tend to be market movers, but
it is important to note that if government ofﬁcials ﬂood the market with
comments and no action, the market would start to become immune to
these comments. However, the MOF and BOJ do have a lengthy history
of interventions in the currency markets to actively manipulate the JPY
in Japan’s best interests; therefore, their comments cannot be completely
disregarded. The most popular tool that the BOJ uses to control monetary
policy is open market operations.
Open Market Operations
These activities are focused on controlling
the uncollateralized overnight call rate. The Bank of Japan has maintained


--- PAGE 266 ---
250
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
a zero interest rate policy for some time now, which means that the Bank
of Japan cannot further decrease this rate to stimulate growth, consump-
tion, or liquidity. Therefore in order to maintain zero interest rates, the
BOJ has to manipulate liquidity through open market operations, target-
ing zero interest on the overnight call rate. It manipulates liquidity by the
outright buying or selling of bills, repos, or Japanese government bonds.
A repo transaction involves a cash taker (borrower) selling securities to a
cash provider (lender), while agreeing to repurchase securities of the same
type and quantity at a later date. This structure is similar to a secured loan,
whereby the cash taker must pay the cash provider interest. These repo
transactions tend to have very short maturities ranging from one day to a
few weeks.
In terms of ﬁscal policy, the Bank of Japan continues to consider a
number of methods to deal with its nonperforming loans. This includes in-
ﬂation targeting, nationalizing a portion of private banks, and repackaging
the banks’ bad debt and selling it at a discount. No policies have been de-
cided upon, but the government is aggressively considering all of these and
other alternatives.
Important Characteristics of the Japanese Yen
r Proxy for Asian strength/weakness.
Japan tends to be seen as a proxy for broad Asian strength because
the country has the largest GDP in Asia. With the most developed cap-
ital markets, Japan was once the primary destination for all investors
who wanted access into the region. Japan also conducts a signiﬁcant
amount of trade with its Asian partners. As a result, economic prob-
lems or political instability in Japan tend to spill over into the other
Asian countries. However, this spillover is not one-sided. Economic or
political problems in other Asian economies can also have dramatic im-
pacts on the Japanese economy and hence movements in the Japanese
yen. For example, North Korean political instability poses a great risk
to Japan and the Japanese yen since of the G-7 nations Japan has the
strongest ties to North Korea.
r Bank of Japan intervention practices.
The BOJ and MOF are very active participants in the FX markets.
That is, they have a lengthy history of entering the FX markets if they
are dissatisﬁed with the current JPY level. As Japan is a very political
economy, with close ties between government ofﬁcials and principals
of large private institutions, the MOF has a very narrow segment in
mind when it decides to depreciate a strong JPY. Since the BOJ is
such an active participant, it is very much in tune with the market’s
movements and other participants. Periodically the BOJ receives


--- PAGE 267 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
251
information on large hedge fund positions from banks and is likely
to intervene when speculators are on the other side of the market,
allowing them to get the most bang for the buck. There are typically
three main factors behind BOJ and MOF intervention:
1.
Amount of appreciation/depreciation in JPY. Intervention has
historically occurred when the yen moves by seven or more yen
in less than six weeks. Using the USD/JPY as a barometer, 7 yen
would be equivalent to 700 pips, which would represent a move
from 117.00 to 125.00. (See Figure 12.5.)
2.
Current USD/JPY rate. Historically, only 11 percent of all BOJ
interventions to counter a strong JPY have occurred above the
115 level.
3.
Speculative positions. In order to maximize the impact of inter-
vention, the BOJ and MOF will intervene when market partici-
pants hold positions in the opposite direction. Traders can ﬁnd a
gauge for the positions of market participants by viewing the In-
ternational Monetary Market (IMM) positions from the CFTC web
site at www.cftc.gov.
r JPY movements are sensitive to time.
JPY crosses can become very active toward the end of the
Japanese ﬁscal year (March 31), as exporters repatriate their dollar-
denominated assets. This is particularly important for Japanese banks
because they need to rebuild their balance sheets to meet Finan-
cial Services Authority (FSA) guidelines, which require the banks to
FIGURE 12.5
USD/JPY Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 268 ---
252
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
mark to market their security holdings. In anticipation of the need
for repatriation-related purchases of the Japanese yen, speculators fre-
quently also bid the yen higher in an attempt to take advantage of this
increased inﬂow. As a result, following ﬁscal year-end, the Japanese
yen tends to have a bias toward depreciation as speculators close their
positions.
Aside from the ﬁscal year-end, time is also a factor on a day-to-day
basis. Unlike traders in London or New York who typically have lunch
at their trading desk, Japanese traders tend to take hourlong lunches
between 10 and 11 p.m. EST, leaving only a junior trader in the ofﬁce.
Therefore, the Japanese lunchtime can be volatile, as the market gets
very illiquid. Aside from that time frame, the JPY tends to move in a
fairly orderly way during Japanese and London hours, unless breaking
announcements or government ofﬁcial comments are made or surpris-
ing economic data is released. During U.S. hours, however, the JPY
tends to have higher volatility, as U.S. traders are actively taking both
USD and JPY positions.
r Banking stocks are widely watched.
Since the crux of Japan’s economic crisis stems from the non-
performing loan (NPL) problems of the Japanese banks, banking
sector stocks are closely watched by FX market participants. Any
threat of default by these banks, disappointing earnings, or further
reports of signiﬁcant NPLs can indicate even deeper problems for the
economy. Therefore, bank stock movements can lead movements in
the Japanese yen.
r Carry trade effects.
The popularity of carry trades has increased in recent years, as
investors are actively seeking high-yielding assets. With the Japanese
yen having the lowest interest rate of all industrialized countries, it is
the primary currency sold or borrowed in carry trades. The most popu-
lar carry trade currencies included GBP/JPY, AUD/JPY, NZD/JPY, and
even USD/JPY. Carry traders would go short the Japanese yen against
the higher-yielding currencies. Therefore reversal of carry trades as
a result of spread narrowing would actually be beneﬁcial for the
Japanese yen, as the reversal process would involve purchasing the
yen against the other currencies.
Important Economic Indicators for Japan
All of the following economic indicators are important for Japan. However,
since Japan is a manufacturing-oriented economy, it is important to pay
particular attention to numbers from the manufacturing sector.


--- PAGE 269 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
253
Gross Domestic Product
Gross domestic product is a broad measure
of the total production and consumption of goods and services measured
over quarterly and yearly periods in Japan. GDP is measured by adding
total expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net foreign
purchases. The GDP price deﬂator is used to convert output measured at
current prices into constant-dollar GDP. Preliminary reports are the most
signiﬁcant for FX market participants.
Tankan
Survey
The Tankan is a short-term economic survey of
Japanese enterprises published four times a year. The survey includes
more than 9,000 enterprises, which are divided into four major groups:
large, small, and medium-sized as well as principal enterprises. The survey
gives an overall impression of the business climate in Japan and is widely
watched and anticipated by foreign exchange market participants.
Balance of Payments
Balance of payments information gives in-
vestors insight into Japan’s international economic transactions that in-
clude goods, services, investment income, and capital ﬂows. The current
account side of BOJ is most often used as a good gauge of international
trade. Figures are released both monthly and semiannually.
Employment
Employment ﬁgures are reported on a monthly basis by
the Management and Coordination Agency of Japan. The employment re-
lease is a measure of the number of jobs and unemployment rate for the
country as a whole. The data is obtained through a statistical survey of the
current labor force. This release is a closely watched economic indicator
because of its timeliness and its importance as a leading indicator of eco-
nomic activity.
Industrial Production
The industrial production (IP) index measures
trends in the output of Japanese manufacturing, mining, and utilities
companies. Output refers to the total quantity of items produced. The
index covers the production of goods for domestic sales in Japan and for
export. It excludes production in the agriculture, construction, transporta-
tion, communication, trade, ﬁnance, and service industries; government
output; and imports. The IP index is then developed by weighting each
component according to its relative importance during the base period.
Investors feel IP and inventory accumulation have strong correlations
with total output and can give good insight into the current state of the
economy.


--- PAGE 270 ---
254
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN
DOLLAR (AUD)
Broad Economic Overview
Australia is the ﬁfth largest country in terms of GDP in the Asia-Paciﬁc re-
gion. Its gross domestic product was approximately US$674 billion in 2006.
Although its economy is relatively small, on a per capita basis it is compa-
rable to many industrialized Western European countries. Australia has a
service-oriented economy with close to 79 percent of GDP coming from
industries such as ﬁnance, property, and business services. However, the
country has a trade deﬁcit, with manufacturing dominating the country’s
exporting activities. Rural and mineral exports account for over 60 percent
of all manufacturing exports. As a result, the economy is highly sensitive
to changes in commodity prices. The breakdowns of Australia’s most im-
portant trading partners are important because downturns or rapid growth
in Australia’s largest trade partners will impact demand for the country’s
imports and exports.
Largest Export Markets
1. Japan
2. European Union
3. China
4. ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations)
5. Republic of Korea
6. United States
Largest Import Sources
1. European Union
2. ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations)
3. China
4. United States
Japan and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are
the leading importers of Australian goods. The ASEAN includes Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, and Vietnam. Therefore, it may be logical to assume that the
Australian economy is highly sensitive to the performance of the countries
in the Asian-Paciﬁc region. However, during the Asian crisis, Australia grew


--- PAGE 271 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
255
at an average rate of 4.7 percent per year from 1997 to 1999 despite the
fact that Asia is the central destination for the bulk of Australian exports.
Australia was able to maintain strength as a result of the country’s sound
foundation of strong domestic consumption. As a result, the economy has
been able to withstand past crises. Consumption has been on a steady rise
since the 1980s. Therefore consumer consumption is an important indica-
tor to watch during times of global economic slowdown for signals of the
slowdown’s spillover effects onto Australia’s domestic consumption.
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Reserve
Bank of Australia
The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) is the central bank of Australia. The
monetary policy committee within the central bank consists of the gov-
ernor (chairman), the deputy governor (vice chairman), secretary to the
treasurer, and six independent members appointed by the government.
Changes on monetary policy are based on consensus within the committee.
Central Bank’s Goals
The RBA’s charter states that the mandate
of the Reserve Bank Board is to focus monetary and banking policy on
ensuring:
r The stability of the currency of Australia.
r The maintenance of full employment in Australia.
r The economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia.
In order to achieve these objectives, the government has set an infor-
mal consumer price inﬂation target of 2 to 3 percent per year. The RBA
believes that the key to long-term sustainable growth in the economy is to
control inﬂation, which would preserve the value of money. In addition,
an inﬂation target provides a discipline for monetary policy making and
guidelines for private sector inﬂation expectations. This also increases the
transparency of the bank’s activities. Should inﬂation or inﬂation expecta-
tions exceed the 2 to 3 percent target, traders should know that it would
raise red ﬂags at the RBA and prompt the central bank to favor a tighter
monetary policy—in other words, further rate hikes.
Monetary policy decisions involve setting the interest rate on overnight
loans in the money market. Other interest rates in the economy are inﬂu-
enced by this interest rate to varying degrees, so that the behavior of bor-
rowers and lenders in the ﬁnancial markets is affected by monetary policy
(though not only by monetary policy). Through these channels, monetary
policy affects the economy in pursuit of the goals outlined earlier.


--- PAGE 272 ---
256
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
Cash Rate
This is the RBA’s target rate for open market operations.
The cash rate is the rate charged on overnight loans between ﬁnancial in-
termediaries. As a result, the cash rate should have a close relationship
with the prevailing money market interest rates. Changes in monetary pol-
icy directly impact the interest rate structure of the ﬁnancial system, and
also impact sentiment in a currency. The chart in Figure 12.6 graphs the
AUD/USD against the interest rate differential between Australia and the
United States. Broadly speaking, there is a clear positive correlation be-
tween the interest rate differential and the movement in the currency. That
is, between 1990 and 1994 Australia aggressively cut interest rates from
a high of 17 percent to 4.75 percent, leading to a sharp decline in the
AUD/USD. A different scenario was seen between 2000 and 2004. At the
time, Australia was raising interest rates while the United States was cut-
ting interest rates. This divergence in monetary policies led to a very strong
rally in the AUD/USD over the next ﬁve years. (See Figure 12.7.)
Maintaining the Cash Rate: Open Market Operations
The focus
of daily open market operations is to keep the cash rate close to the tar-
get by managing money market liquidity provided to commercial banks. If
the Reserve Bank wishes to decrease the cash rate, it would increase the
AUD/USD vs. Interest Rate Defferential
1.00
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
Int. Rate Differential
0.50
AUD/USD
Date
AUD/USD
Bond Spread
0.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
1/2/2004
5/21/2004
10/8/2004
2/25/2005
7/15/2005
12/2/2005
4/21/2006
9/8/2006
1/26/2007
6/15/2007
11/2/2007
3/21/2008
FIGURE 12.6
AUD/USD and Bond Spread


--- PAGE 273 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
257
FIGURE 12.7
AUD/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
supply of short-dated repurchase agreements at a lower interest rate than
the prevailing cash rate, which would in essence decrease the cash rate. If
the Reserve Bank wishes to increase the cash rate, it would decrease the
supply of short-dated repurchase agreements, which would in essence in-
crease the cash rate. A repurchase agreement involves a cash taker (com-
mercial bank) selling securities to a cash provider (RBA), while agreeing
to repurchase securities of the same type and quantity at a later date. This
structure is similar to a secured loan, whereby the cash taker must pay
the cash provider interest. These repo transactions tend to have very short
maturities ranging from one day to a few weeks.
Australia has had a ﬂoating exchange rate since 1983. The Reserve
Bank of Australia may undertake foreign exchange market operations
when the market threatens to become excessively volatile or when the ex-
change rate is clearly inconsistent with underlying economic fundamen-
tals. The RBA monitors a trade-weighted index as well as the cross-rate
with the U.S. dollar. Intervention operations are invariably aimed at stabi-
lizing market conditions rather than meeting exchange rate targets.
Monetary Policy Meetings
The RBA meets every month (except for
January) on the ﬁrst Tuesday of the month to discuss potential changes in
monetary policy. Following each meeting, the RBA issues a press release
outlining justiﬁcations for its monetary policy changes. It releases a state-
ment regardless of whether interest rates are changed. The RBA also pub-
lishes a monthly Reserve Bank Bulletin. The May and November issues of


--- PAGE 274 ---
258
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
the Reserve Bank Bulletin include the semiannual statement on the Con-
duct of Monetary Policy. The February, May, August, and November issues
contain a Quarterly Report on the Economy and Financial Markets. It is
important to read these bulletins for signals on potential monetary policy
changes.
Important Characteristics of the
Australian Dollar
r Commodity-linked currency.
Historically, the Australian dollar has had a very strong correlation
(approximately 80 percent) with commodity prices and, more specif-
ically, with gold prices. The correlation stems from the fact that Aus-
tralia is the world’s third largest gold producer, and gold represents
approximately $5 billion in exports for the nation each year. As a re-
sult, the Australian dollar beneﬁts when commodity prices increase.
Of course, it also decreases when commodity prices decline. If com-
modity prices are strong, inﬂationary fears start to appear and the RBA
would be inclined to increase rates to curb inﬂation. However, this is
a sensitive topic, as gold prices tend to increase in times of global eco-
nomic or political uncertainty. If the RBA increases rates during those
conditions, it leaves Australia more vulnerable to spillover effects.
r Carry trade effects.
Australia has one of the highest interest rates among the developed
countries. With a fairly liquid currency, the Australian dollar is one of
the most popular currencies to use for carry trades. A carry trade in-
volves buying or lending a currency with a high interest rate and sell-
ing or borrowing a currency with a low interest rate. The popularity of
the carry trade has contributed to the 95 percent rise of the Australian
dollar against the U.S. dollar between 2001 and 2007. Many foreign in-
vestors were looking for high yields when equity investments offered
minimal returns. However, carry trades last only as long as the actual
yield advantage remains. If global central banks increase their interest
rates and the positive interest rate differentials between Australia and
other countries narrow, the AUD/USD could suffer from an exodus of
carry traders.
r Drought effects.
Since the majority of Australia’s exports are commodities, the
country’s GDP is highly sensitive to severe weather conditions that
may damage the country’s farming activities. For example, 2002 was
a particularly difﬁcult year for Australia, because the country was ex-
periencing a severe drought. The drought had taken an extreme toll
on Australia’s farming activities. This is especially important because


--- PAGE 275 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
259
agriculture accounts for 3 percent of the country’s GDP. The RBA esti-
mates that the “decline in farm production could directly reduce GDP
growth by around 1 percentage point.” Aside from exporting activities,
a drought also has indirect effects on other aspects of Australia’s econ-
omy. Industries that supply and service agriculture, such as the whole-
sale and transport sectors, as well as retail operations in rural farming
areas may also be negatively affected by a drought. However, it is im-
portant to note that the Australian economy has a history of recovering
strongly after a drought. The 1982–1983 drought ﬁrst subtracted, then
subsequently added, around 1 to 1.5 percentage points to GDP growth.
The 1991–1995 drought reduced GDP by around 0.5 to 0.75 percent-
age points in 1991–1992 and 1994–1995, but eventually boosted GDP
by 0.75 percentage points.
r Interest rate differentials.
Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of Australia and
the short-term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries
should also be closely watched by professional traders of the Aus-
tralian dollar. These differentials can be good indicators of potential
money ﬂows as they indicate how much premium yield Australian dol-
lar short-term ﬁxed income assets are offering over foreign short-term
ﬁxed income assets, or vice versa. This differential provides traders
with indications of potential currency movements, as investors are al-
ways looking for assets with the highest yields. This is particularly im-
portant to carry traders who enter and exit their positions based on the
positive interest rate differentials between global ﬁxed income assets.
Important Economic Indicators for Australia
Gross Domestic Product
Gross domestic product is a measure of the
total production and consumption of goods and services in Australia. GDP
is measured by adding expenditures by households, businesses, govern-
ment, and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deﬂator is used to convert
output measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is
used to gauge where in the business cycle Australia ﬁnds itself. Fast growth
often is perceived as inﬂationary while low (or negative) growth indicates
a recessionary or weak economy.
Consumer Price Index
The consumer price index (CPI) measures
quarterly changes in the price of a basket of goods and services that
account for a high proportion of expenditure by the CPI population
group (i.e., metropolitan households). This basket covers a wide range of
goods and services, including food, housing, education, transportation, and


--- PAGE 276 ---
260
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
health. This is the key indicator to watch as monetary policy changes are
made based on this index, which is a measure of inﬂation.
Balance of Goods and Services
This number is a monthly measure
of Australia’s international trade in goods and services on a balance of pay-
ments basis. General merchandise imports and exports are derived mainly
from international trade statistics, which are based on Australian Customs
Service records. The current account is the balance of trade plus services.
Private Consumption
This is a national accounts measure that re-
ﬂects current expenditure by households, and producers of private non-
proﬁt services to households. It includes purchases of durable as well as
nondurable goods. However, it excludes expenditures by persons on the
purchase of dwellings and expenditures of a capital nature by unincor-
porated enterprises. This number is important to watch, as private con-
sumption or consumer consumption is the foundation for resilience in the
Australian economy.
Producer Price Index
The producer price index (PPI) is a family of
indexes that measures average changes in selling prices received by do-
mestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks changes in prices for
nearly every goods-producing industry in the domestic economy, includ-
ing agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, ﬁsheries, manufactur-
ing, and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted ﬁnished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a month-on-
month, quarter-on-quarter, half-year-on-half-year, and year-on-year basis.
Australia’s PPI data is released on a quarterly basis.
CURRENCY PROFILE: NEW ZEALAND
DOLLAR (NZD)
Broad Economic Overview
New Zealand is a very small economy with GDP valued at approximately
US$107 billion in 2006. In fact, at the time of publication the country’s pop-
ulation is equivalent to less than half of the population of New York City.
It was once one of the most regulated countries within the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), but over the past
two decades the country has been moving toward a more open, modern,
and stable economy. With the passing of the Fiscal Responsibility Act of
1994, the country is shifting from an agricultural farming community to
one that seeks to become a leading knowledge-based economy with high
skills, high employment, and high value-added production. This Act sets


--- PAGE 277 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
261
legal standards that hold the government formally responsible to the pub-
lic for its ﬁscal performance. It also sets the framework for the country’s
macroeconomic policies. The following are the principles outlined under
the Fiscal Responsibility Act:
r Debt must be reduced to prudent levels by achieving surpluses on the
operating budget every year until such a level is reached.
r Debt must be reduced to prudent levels and the government must en-
sure that expenditure is lower than revenue.
r Sufﬁcient levels of Crown net worth must be achieved and maintained
to guard against adverse future events.
r Reasonable taxation policies must be followed.
r Fiscal risks facing the government must be prudently managed.
New Zealand also has highly developed manufacturing and services
sectors, with the agricultural industry driving the bulk of the country’s
exports. The economy is strongly trade oriented, with exports of goods
and services representing approximately one-third of GDP. Due to the
small size of the economy and its signiﬁcant trade activities, New Zealand
is highly sensitive to global performance, especially of its key trading
partners, Australia and Japan. Together, Australia and Japan represent
30 percent of New Zealand’s trading activity. During the Asian crisis, New
Zealand’s GDP contracted by 1.3 percent as a result of reduced demand for
exports, as well as two consecutive droughts that reduced agricultural and
related production. New Zealand’s most important trading partners are:
Leading Export Markets
1. Australia
2. United States
3. Japan
Leading Import Sources
1. Australia
2. China
3. United States
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Reserve
Bank of New Zealand
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) is the central bank of New
Zealand. The Monetary Policy Committee is an internal committee of bank


--- PAGE 278 ---
262
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
executives who review monetary policy on a weekly basis. Meetings to de-
cide on changes to monetary policy occur eight times a year or approxi-
mately every six weeks. Unlike most other central banks, the decision for
rate changes rests ultimately on the bank’s governor. The current Policy
Target Agreements set by the minister and the governor focus on maintain-
ing policy stability and avoiding unnecessary instability in output, interest
rates, and the exchange rate. Price stability refers to maintaining the an-
nual CPI inﬂation at 1.5 percent. If the RBNZ does not meet this target, the
government has the ability to dismiss the governor of the RBNZ, though
this is rarely done. This serves as a strong incentive for the RBNZ to meet
its inﬂation target. The most common tools used by the RBNZ to implement
monetary policy changes are:
Ofﬁcial Cash Rate
The ofﬁcial cash rate (OCR) is the rate set by the
RBNZ to implement monetary policy. The bank lends overnight cash at 25
basis points above the OCR rate and receives deposits or pays interest at
25 basis points below this rate. By controlling the cost of liquidity for com-
mercial banks, the RBNZ can inﬂuence the interest rates offered to indi-
viduals and corporations. This effectively creates a 50-basis-point corridor
that bounds the interbank overnight rate. The idea is that banks offering
funds above the upper bound will attract few takers, because funds can be
borrowed for a lower cost from the RBNZ. Banks offering rates below the
lower bound also will attract few takers, because they are offering lower
yields than the RBNZ. The ofﬁcial cash rate is reviewed and manipulated
to maintain economic stability.
Objectives for Fiscal Policy
Open market operations are used to
meet the cash target. The cash target is the targeted amount of re-
serves held by registered banks. The current target is NZ$20 million. The
RBNZ prepares forecasts of daily ﬂuctuations on the cash target and
will then use these forecasts to determine the amount of funds to in-
ject or withdraw in order to meet the cash target. The following objec-
tives from the New Zealand Treasury provide a guideline for ﬁscal policy
measures:
r Expenses. Expenses will average around 35 percent of GDP over the
horizon used to calculate contributions toward future New Zealand su-
perannuation (NZS) costs. During the buildup of assets to meet future
NZS costs, expenses plus contributions will be around 35 percent of
GDP. In the longer term, expenses less withdrawals to meet NZS costs
will be around 35 percent of GDP.
r Revenue. Raise sufﬁcient revenue to meet the operating balance objec-
tive: a robust, broad-based tax system that raises revenue in a fair and
efﬁcient way.


--- PAGE 279 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
263
r Operating balance. Operating surplus on average over the economic
cycle sufﬁcient to meet the requirements for contributions toward fu-
ture NZS costs and ensure consistency with the debt objective.
r Debt. Gross debt below 30 percent of GDP on average over the eco-
nomic cycle. Net debt, which excludes the assets to meet future NZS
costs, below 20 percent of GDP on average over the economic cycle.
r Net worth. Increase net worth consistent with the operating balance
objective. This will be achieved through a buildup of assets to meet
future NZS costs.
Important Characteristics of the
New Zealand Dollar
r Strong correlation with AUD.
Australia is New Zealand’s largest trading partner. This, coupled
with the proximity of the countries and the fact that New Zealand is
highly trade oriented, creates strong ties between the economies of the
two countries. When the Australian economy does well and Australian
corporations increase their importing activities, New Zealand is one of
the ﬁrst to beneﬁt. In fact, since 1999, the Australian economy has per-
formed extremely well with a booming housing market that created a
need to increase imports of building products. As a result, this strength
translated into a 10 percent increase in Australia’s imports from New
Zealand between 1999 and 2002. Figure 12.8 illustrates how these two
currency pairs are near-perfect mirror images of each other. In fact,
over the past ﬁve years, the two currency pairs have had a positive
correlation of approximately 97 percent.
r Commodity-linked currency.
New Zealand is an export-driven economy with commodities rep-
resenting over 40 percent of the country’s exports. This has resulted
in a 50 percent positive correlation between the New Zealand dollar
and commodity prices. That is, as commodity prices increase, the New
Zealand dollar also has a bias for appreciation. The correlation be-
tween the Australian dollar and the New Zealand dollar contributes
to the currency’s status as a commodity-linked currency. However, the
New Zealand dollar’s correlation with commodity prices is not limited
to its own trade activities. In fact, the performance of the Australian
economy is also highly correlated with commodity prices. Therefore,
as commodity prices increase, the Australian economy beneﬁts, trans-
lating into increased activity in all aspects of the country’s operations,
including trade with New Zealand.
r Carry trades.
With one of the highest interest rates of the industrialized coun-
tries, the New Zealand dollar has traditionally been one of the most


--- PAGE 280 ---
264
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
AUD/USD vs. NZD/USD 1998–2008
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
NZD/USD
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
AUD/USD (Ihs)
NZD/USD (rhs)
AUD/USD
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
FIGURE 12.8
AUD/USD vs. NZD/USD Chart
popular currencies to purchase for carry trades. A carry trade involves
buying or lending a currency with a high interest rate and selling or
borrowing a currency with a low interest rate. The popularity of the
carry trade has contributed to the rise of the New Zealand dollar in
an environment where many global investors are looking for opportu-
nities to earn high yields. However, this also makes the New Zealand
dollar particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates. That is, when
the United States begins increasing interest rates while New Zealand
stays on hold or reduces interest rates, the carry advantage of the New
Zealand dollar would narrow. In such situations, the New Zealand dol-
lar could come under pressure as speculators reverse their carry trader
positions. (See Figure 12.9.)
r Interest rate differentials.
Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of New Zealand
and the short-term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries
are closely watched by professional NZD traders. These differentials


--- PAGE 281 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
265
FIGURE 12.9
NZD/USD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)
can be good indicators of potential money ﬂows as they indicate how
much premium yield NZD short-term ﬁxed income assets are offering
over foreign short-term ﬁxed income assets, or vice versa. This
differential provides traders with indications of potential currency
movements, as investors are always looking for assets with the highest
yields. This is particularly important to carry traders who enter and
exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differentials
between global ﬁxed income assets.
r Population migration.
As mentioned earlier, New Zealand has a very small population,
equal to less than half that of New York City. Therefore, increases in
migration into the country can have signiﬁcant effects on the econ-
omy. Between 2006 and 2007, the population of New Zealand in-
creased by 161,276 people versus an increase of 1,700 between 2001
and 2002. Although these absolute numbers appear small, for New
Zealand they are fairly signiﬁcant. In fact, this strong population
migration into New Zealand has contributed signiﬁcantly to the per-
formance of the economy, because as the population increases, the de-
mand for household goods increases, leading to an increase in overall
consumption.
r Drought effects.
Since the bulk of New Zealand’s exports are commodities, the
country’s GDP is highly sensitive to severe weather conditions that
may damage the country’s farming activities. In 1998, droughts cost the
country over $50 million. In addition, droughts are also very frequent in
Australia, New Zealand’s largest trading partner. These droughts have


--- PAGE 282 ---
266
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
cost Australia up to 1 percent in GDP, which also translated into a neg-
ative impact on the New Zealand economy.
Important Economic Indicators for New Zealand
New Zealand does not release economic indicators often, but the following
are the most important.
Gross Domestic Product
GDP is a quarterly measure of the total pro-
duction and consumption of goods and services in New Zealand. GDP is
measured by adding expenditures by households, businesses, government,
and net foreign purchases. The GDP price deﬂator is used to convert out-
put measured at current prices into constant-dollar GDP. This data is used
to gauge where in the business cycle New Zealand ﬁnds itself. Fast growth
often is perceived as inﬂationary while low (or negative) growth indicates
a recessionary or weak economy.
Consumer Price Index
The consumer price index (CPI) measures
quarterly changes in the price of a basket of goods and services that ac-
count for a high proportion of expenditure by the CPI population group
(i.e., metropolitan households). This basket covers a wide range of goods
and services including food, housing, education, transportation, and health.
This is the key indicator to watch as monetary policy changes are made
based on this index, which is a measure of inﬂation.
Balance of Goods and Services
New Zealand’s balance of payments
statements are records of the value of New Zealand’s transactions in goods,
services, income, and transfers with the rest of the world, and the changes
in New Zealand’s ﬁnancial claims on the rest of the world (assets) and li-
abilities to the rest of the world. New Zealand’s International Investment
Position statement shows, at a particular point in time, the stock of a coun-
try’s international ﬁnancial assets and international ﬁnancial liabilities.
Private Consumption
This is a national accounts measure that re-
ﬂects current expenditure by households, and producers of private non-
proﬁt services to households. It includes purchases of durable as well as
nondurable goods. However, it excludes expenditures by persons on the
purchase of dwellings and expenditures of a capital nature by unincorpo-
rated enterprises.
Producer Price Index
The producer price index (PPI) is a family of
indexes that measures average changes in selling prices received by do-
mestic producers for their output. The PPI tracks changes in prices for


--- PAGE 283 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
267
nearly every goods-producing industry in the domestic economy, includ-
ing agriculture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, ﬁsheries, manufactur-
ing, and mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally
adjusted ﬁnished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a month-on-
month, quarter-on-quarter, half-year-on-half-year, and year-on-year basis.
New Zealand’s PPI data is released on a quarterly basis.
CURRENCY PROFILE: CANADIAN
DOLLAR (CAD)
Broad Economic Overview
Canada is the world’s seventh largest country with GDP valued at US$1.178
trillion in 2006. The country has been growing consistently since 1991. It is
typically known as a resource-based economy, as the country’s early eco-
nomic development hinged upon exploitation and exports of the country’s
natural resources. It is now the world’s ﬁfth largest producer of gold and
the fourteenth largest producer of oil. However, in actuality nearly two-
thirds of the country’s GDP comes from the service sector, which also em-
ploys three out of every four Canadians. The strength in the service sector
is partly attributed to the trend by businesses to subcontract a large portion
of their services. This may include a manufacturing company subcontract-
ing delivery services to a transportation company. Despite this, manufac-
turing and resources are still very important for the Canadian economy, as
they represent over 25 percent of the country’s exports and are the primary
source of income for a number of provinces.
The Canadian economy started to advance with the depreciation of its
currency against the U.S. dollar and the Free Trade Agreement that came
into effect on January 1, 1989. This agreement eliminated almost all trade
tariffs between the United States and Canada. As a result, Canada now
exports over 78 percent of their goods to the United States. Further ne-
gotiations to incorporate Mexico created the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), which took effect on January 1, 1994. This more
advanced treaty eliminated most tariffs on trading between all three coun-
tries. Canada’s close trade relationship with the United States makes it par-
ticularly sensitive to the health of the U.S. economy. If the U.S. economy
sputters, demand for Canadian exports would suffer. The same is true for
the opposite scenario: if U.S. economic growth is robust, Canadian exports
will beneﬁt. The following is a breakdown of Canada’s trading partners:
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. United Kingdom


--- PAGE 284 ---
268
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
3. China
4. Japan
5. Eurozone
Leading Import Sources
1. United States
2. China
3. Eurozone
4. United Kingdom
5. Japan
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Bank
of Canada
Canada’s central bank is known as the Bank of Canada (BOC). The Gov-
erning Council of the Bank of Canada is the board that is responsible for
setting monetary policy. This council consists of seven members: the gov-
ernor and six deputy governors. The Bank of Canada meets approximately
eight times per year to discuss changes in monetary policy. It also releases
a monthly monetary policy update every quarter.
Central Bank Goals
The Bank of Canada’s focus is on maintaining
the “integrity and value of the currency.” This primarily involves ensuring
price stability. Price stability is maintained by adhering to an inﬂation tar-
get agreed upon with the Department of Finance. This inﬂation target is
currently set at 1 to 3 percent. The bank believes that high inﬂation can
be damaging to the functioning of the economy, while low inﬂation on the
other hand equates to price stability, which can help to foster sustainable
long-term economic growth. The BOC controls inﬂation through short-term
interest rates. If inﬂation is above the target, the bank will apply tighter
monetary conditions. If it is below the target, the bank will loosen mone-
tary policy. Overall, the central bank has done a pretty good job of keeping
the inﬂation target within the band since 1998.
The bank measures monetary conditions using its Monetary Condi-
tions Index, which is a weighted sum of changes in the 90-day commercial
paper rate and G-10 trade-weighted exchange rate. The weight of the inter-
est rate versus the exchange rate is 3 to 1, which is the effect of a change in
interest rates on the exchange rate based on historical studies. This means
that a 1 percent increase in short-term interest rates is the same as a 3 per-
cent appreciation of the trade-weighted exchange rate. In order to change
monetary policies, the BOC would manipulate the bank rate, which would
in turn affect the exchange rate. If the currency appreciates to undesirable


--- PAGE 285 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
269
levels, the BOC can decrease interest rates to offset the rise. If it depreci-
ates, the BOC can raise rates. However, interest rate changes are not used
for the purposes of manipulating the exchange rate. Instead, they are used
to control inﬂation. The following are the tools most commonly used by
the BOC to implement monetary policy.
Bank Rate
This is the main rate used to control inﬂation. It is the rate
of interest that the Bank of Canada charges to commercial banks. Changes
to this rate will affect other interest rates, including mortgage rates and
prime rates charged by commercial banks. Therefore changes to this rate
will ﬁlter into the overall economy.
Open Market Operations
The Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) is
the framework for the Bank of Canada’s implementation of monetary pol-
icy. It is through this framework that Canada’s commercial banks borrow
and lend overnight money to each other in order to fund their daily trans-
actions. The LVTS is an electronic platform through which these ﬁnancial
institutions conduct large transactions. The interest rate charged on these
overnight loans is called the overnight rate or bank rate. The BOC can ma-
nipulate the overnight rate by offering to lend at rates lower or higher than
the current market rate if the overnight lending rate is trading above or
below the target banks.
On a regular basis, the bank releases a number of publications that are
important to watch. This includes a biannual Monetary Policy Report that
contains an assessment of the current economic environment and impli-
cations for inﬂation and a quarterly Bank of Canada Review that includes
economic commentary, feature articles, speeches by members of the Gov-
erning Council, and important announcements.
Important Characteristics of the Canadian Dollar
r Commodity-linked currency.
Canada’s economy is highly dependent on commodities. As men-
tioned earlier, they are currently the world’s ﬁfth largest gold producer
and the fourteenth largest oil producer. The positive correlation be-
tween the Canadian dollar and commodity prices is close to 60 percent.
Strong commodity prices generally beneﬁt domestic producers and in-
crease their income from exports. There is a caveat, though, and that
is eventually strong commodity prices will hurt external demand from
places like the United States, which could ﬁlter into reduced demand
for Canadian exports.
r Strong correlation with the United States.
The United States imports 78 percent of Canada’s exports. Canada
has been running merchandise trade surpluses with the United States


--- PAGE 286 ---
270
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
since the 1980s. The current account surplus with the United States
reached a record high of $90 billion in 2003. Strong demand from the
United States and strong energy prices led to record highs in the value
of energy exports of approximately $36 billion in 2001. Therefore the
Canadian economy is highly sensitive to changes in the U.S. economy.
As the U.S. economy accelerates, trade increases with Canadian com-
panies, beneﬁting the performance of the overall economy. However,
as the U.S. economy slows, the Canadian economy will be hurt signiﬁ-
cantly as U.S. companies reduce their importing activities.
r Mergers and acquisitions.
Due to the proximity of the United States and Canada, cross-
border mergers and acquisitions are very common, as companies
worldwide strive for globalization. These mergers and acquisitions
lead to money ﬂowing between the two countries, which ultimately
impact the currencies. Speciﬁcally, the signiﬁcant U.S. acquisition of
Canadian energy companies in 2001 led to U.S. corporations injecting
over $25 billion into Canada. This led to a strong rally in USD/CAD, as
the U.S. companies needed to sell USD and buy CAD in order to pay for
their acquisitions. Figure 12.10 shows the ﬁve year chart of USD/CAD.
r Interest rate differentials.
Interest rate differentials between the cash rates of Canada and
the short-term interest rate yields of other industrialized countries are
closely watched by professional Canadian dollar traders. These differ-
entials can be good indicators of potential money ﬂows as they indicate
how much premium yield Canadian dollar short-term ﬁxed income as-
sets are offering over foreign short-term ﬁxed income assets, or vice
FIGURE 12.10
USD/CAD Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)


--- PAGE 287 ---
Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs
271
versa. This differential provides traders with indications of potential
currency movements, as investors are always looking for assets with
the highest yields. This is particularly important to carry traders who
enter and exit their positions based on the positive interest rate differ-
entials between global ﬁxed income assets.
r Carry trades.
The Canadian dollar became a popular currency to use for carry
trades after its three-quarter-point rate increases between April and
July of 2002. A carry trade involves buying or lending a currency with a
high interest rate and selling or borrowing a currency with a low inter-
est rate. When Canada has a higher interest rate than the United States,
the short USD/CAD carry trade becomes one of the more popular carry
trades due to the proximity of the two countries. The carry trade is a
popular trade, as many foreign investors and hedge funds look for op-
portunities to earn high yields. However, if the United States embarks
on a tightening campaign or Canada begins to lower rates, the positive
interest rate differential between the Canadian dollar and other curren-
cies would narrow. In such situations, the Canadian dollar could come
under pressure if the speculators begin to exit their carry trades.
Important Economic Indicators for Canada
Unemployment
The unemployment rate represents the number of un-
employed persons expressed as a percentage of the labor force.
Consumer Price Index
This measures the average rate of increase in
prices. When economists speak of inﬂation as an economic problem, they
generally mean a persistent increase in the general price level over a period
of time, resulting in a decline in a currency’s purchasing power. Inﬂation
is often measured as a percentage increase in the consumer price index
(CPI). Canada’s inﬂation policy, as set out by the federal government and
the Bank of Canada, aims to keep inﬂation within a target range of 1 to 3
percent. If the rate of inﬂation is 10 percent a year, $100 worth of purchases
last year will, on average, cost $110 this year. At the same inﬂation rate,
those purchases will cost $121 next year, and so on.
Gross Domestic Product
Canada’s gross domestic product (GDP)
is the total value of all goods and services produced within Canada dur-
ing a given year. It is a measure of the income generated by production
within Canada. GDP is also referred to as economic output. To avoid count-
ing the same output more than once, GDP includes only ﬁnal goods and
services—not those that are used to make another product: GDP would


--- PAGE 288 ---
272
DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET
not include the wheat used to make bread, but would include the bread
itself.
Balance of Trade
The balance of trade is a statement of a country’s
trade in goods (merchandise) and services. It covers trade in products such
as manufactured goods, raw materials, and agricultural goods, as well as
travel and transportation. The balance of trade is the difference between
the value of the goods and services that a country exports and the value
of the goods and services that it imports. If a country’s exports exceed its
imports, it has a trade surplus and the trade balance is said to be positive.
If imports exceed exports, the country has a trade deﬁcit and its trade bal-
ance is said to be negative.
Producer Price Index
The producer price index (PPI) is a family of in-
dexes that measures average changes in selling prices received by domes-
tic producers for their output. The PPI tracks changes in prices for nearly
every goods-producing industry in the domestic economy, including agri-
culture, electricity and natural gas, forestry, ﬁsheries, manufacturing, and
mining. Foreign exchange markets tend to focus on seasonally adjusted
ﬁnished goods PPI and how the index has reacted on a month-on-month,
quarter-on-quarter, half-year-on-half-year, and year-on-year basis.
Consumer Consumption
This is a national accounts measure that re-
ﬂects current expenditure by households, and producers of private non-
proﬁt services to households. It includes purchases of durable as well as
nondurable goods. However, it excludes expenditures by persons on the
purchase of dwellings and expenditures of a capital nature by unincorpo-
rated enterprises.


--- PAGE 289 ---
About the Author
K
athy Lien is the Director of Currency Research at GFT Forex. She
is responsible for providing research and analysis including techni-
cal and fundamental research reports, market commentaries, and
trading strategies. Prior to joining GFT, Lien was the Chief Strategist of
DailyFX.com and an associate at JPMorgan Chase where she worked
in cross-markets and foreign exchange trading. She has vast experience
within the interbank market using both technical and fundamental analysis
to trade FX spot and options. She also has experience trading a number of
products outside of FX, including interest rate derivatives, bonds, equities,
and futures. Lien has written for Active Trader, Futures, and SFO mag-
azines and is frequently quoted on CNBC, Bloomberg, Fox Business, and
Reuters. She is also the author of the ﬁrst edition of Day Trading the Cur-
rency Market as well as Millionaire Traders, both of which are published
by Wiley.
273


--- PAGE 290 ---


--- PAGE 291 ---
Index
10-day Simple moving average (SMA),
136
15-minute Charts, 112–13
20-day Exponential moving average
(EMA), 150
20-day Simple moving average (SMA),
136
50-day Simple moving average (SMA),
136
100-day Simple moving average (SMA),
136, 150
2004 U.S. presidential election,
178–9
Advances, 10
ADX (Average Directional Index) less
than 20:
range trading, 99–100
trend trading, 102
Appreciation/depreciation, 251
Around-the-clock market, 5–6
ASEAN (Association of Southeast
Asian Nations), 254
Asian ﬁnancial crisis, 30–33
the bubble, 30
currency crisis, 31–3
current accounts deﬁcit and
nonperforming loans, 30–31
Asian market, 120
Asian session (Tokyo), 67–9
Asian strength/weakness, 250
Assets market model:
about, 54
currency substitution model,
55–7
dollar driven theory, 55
limitations of, 55, 57
Yen example, 56–7
Australian Dollar (AUD), 87–8
broad economic overview, 254
currency proﬁles and unique
characteristics, 254–60
important characteristics of
Australian Dollar, 258–9
important economic indicators for
Australia, 259–60
leading export markets, 254
monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA), 255–8
Australian Dollar, important
characteristics of:
carry trade effects, 258
commodity-linked currency, 258
drought effects, 258–9
interest rate differentials, 259
Australian Dollar, important economic
indicators for:
balance of goods and services, 260
consumer price index (CPI), 259–60
gross domestic product (GDP),
259
private consumption, 260
producer price index (PPI), 260
Austria, 33
Average down, 211
Average drawdown, 213
Back-testing, 211
Baht currency, 31
275


--- PAGE 292 ---
276
INDEX
Balance of goods and services:
important economic indicators for
Australia, 260
important economic indicators for
the New Zealand, 266
Balance of payments, 48
important economic indicators for
Japan, 253
important economic indicators for
Switzerland, 247
Balance of payments deﬁcit, 49
Balance of payments theory:
about, 46–7
capital ﬂows, 47–8
model limitations, 49
summary of capital and trade ﬂows,
48–9
trade ﬂows, 47
Balance of trade, 272
Bank of Canada Review (BOC), 269
Bank of England (BOE), 10, 235
Bank of England failure:
Soros bets against, 28–9
United Kingdom joins Exchange
Rate Mechanism, 27–8
Bank of Japan (BOJ), 10
intervention practices, 250–251
reports, 249
Bank rate, 269
Bank rate vs. exchange rate, 268
Bank Repo Rate, 236
Banking stocks, 252
Basket of goods, 50
Belgium, 33
Big events timing, 177–8
Big Mac index, 50
Black Wednesday, 3, 28
Bollinger Bands, 93, 100
Bond markets see ﬁxed income
markets:
Bond spreads as a leading indicator,
185–8
interest rate differentials, 185–8
interest rate differentials
calculations and currency pairs,
188
Booker, Bob, 210
Bottom ﬁshing, 155–6
Boucher, Mark, 109
Breaks, 108
Bretton Woods Conference, 21–3
British Pound (GBP):
Bank Repo Rate, 236
broad economic overview,
233–4
currency proﬁles and unique
characteristics, 233–40
important characteristics,
236–9
important economic indicators for
the United Kingdom, 239–41
leading export markets,
233–4
leading import markets, 234
monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of England (BOE),
235–6
open market operations, 236
vs. United Kingdom adoption of
Euro, 234–5
British Pound (GBP), important
characteristics of, 236–9
energy price correlation, 239
Eurosterling futures, 238
GBP crosses, 239
GBP/USD liquidity, 236–7
interest rate differentials between
gilts and foreign bonds, 238
names used for, 237
speculation in, 237–8
U.K. politicians’ impact on Euro,
238–9
Bubbles:
Asian ﬁnancial crisis, 30
housing market, 62
Japan’s bubble, 248–9
tech, 41
Budget deﬁcits, 232
Cable see British Pound (GBP):
Calculation of currency correlations,
77–80


--- PAGE 293 ---
Index
277
Canadian Dollar (CAD):
broad economic overview, 267–8
important characteristics of
Canadian Dollar, 269–71
important economic indicators for
Canada, 271–2
leading export markets, 267–8
leading import markets, 268
monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of Canada, 268–9
Canadian Dollar, important
characteristics of:
carry trades, 271
commodity-linked currency, 269
interest rate differentials, 270–271
merger and acquisitions, 270
strong correlation with the United
States, 269–70
Canadian Dollar, important economic
indicators for:
balance of trade, 272
consumer conﬁdence, 272
consumer price index (CPI), 271
gross domestic product (GDP),
271–2
producer price index (PPI), 272
unemployment, 271
Candlestick chart, 124
Capital and trade ﬂows:
physical ﬂows, 39–40
portfolio ﬂows, 40
trade ﬂows, 41–2
Capital ﬂow balance, 39, 48
Capital ﬂows:
balance of payments theory, 47–8
capital and trade ﬂows, 39–40
equity markets, 47–8
ﬁxed income markets, 48
Carry trade considerations:
low-interest-rate currency
appreciation, 175
time horizon, 176
trade balances, 175–6
Carry trade effects, 244, 252, 258
Carry trade failures, 172–3
Carry trade operations, 170–171
Carry trade optimization, 171–2
Carry trade workings, 169–70
Carry trades, 263–4, 271
Cash rate, 256
Central banks, 10
inability of, 31
role of, 26–7
Central banks’ goals:
monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of Canada, 268–9
monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA), 255
Swiss National Bank, 242–3
Centralized markets, 17–18
Changeability of currency
correlations, 77
Channel strategy:
about, 135–6
examples of, 136–8
Charting economic surprises, 42–3
Charts, 45
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME),
14–15
China, 39–40, 219–20, 247
Chinese Renminbi (RNB), 39–40
Commissions, 6, 11
Commodities, 257
Commodity prices as a leading
indicator, 180–185
gold, 181–2
oil, 181–4
trading opportunity, 184–5
Commodity-linked currency, 258, 263,
269
Conditional orders, 115
Consumer conﬁdence, 272
Consumer Conﬁdence Survey, 224
Consumer consumption, 255
Consumer price index (CPI), 10
economic indicators for the United
States, 222
important economic indicators for
Australia, 259–60
important economic indicators for
Canada, 271


--- PAGE 294 ---
278
INDEX
Consumer price index (CPI) (cont.)
important economic indicators for
Switzerland, 246
important economic indicators for
the New Zealand, 266
Correlation analysis, 75
Correlation trading with fundamentals,
203–4
Correlation trading with technicals,
204–5
Correlation with gold, 244
Correlations:
between Nikkei and Dow, 201–2
between Nikkei and USD/JPY, 202
between USD/JPY and Dow, 202–3
Crawling peg, 31
Credit default, 15
Currencies see also currency proﬁles
and unique characteristics;
speciﬁc currencies:
effects of, on stocks and bonds, 1–3
EUR/USD and corporate
proﬁtability, 2
George Soros, 3
Nikkei and U.S. Dollar, 2–3
Currency correlations, 75–80
about, 75
calculation of, 77–80
changeability of, 77
positive/negative correlations,
meaning of, 76–7
Currency crisis, 31–3
Currency deal usage, 219
Currency forecasting, 46–57
assets market model, 54–5
balance of payments theory, 46–9
interest rate parity, 51
monetary model, 51–3
purchasing power parity (PPP)
theory, 49–51
real interest rate differential model,
53–4
Currency movement, long term, 37–57
about, 37
charting economic surprises, 42–3
currency forecasting, 46–57
fundamental analysis, 38–44
technical analysis, 44–5
Currency pair checklist, 92–5
Currency pair ranges, 68
Currency pairs choice, 161–2
Currency pairs, major, 215–40
Currency proﬁles and unique
characteristics:
Australian Dollar (AUD), 254–60
British Pound (GBP), 233–40
Canadian Dollar (CAD), 267–72
Euro (EUR), 224–33
Japanese Yen (JPY), 247–53
New Zealand Dollar (NZD),
260–267
Swiss Franc (CHF), 241–7
U.S. Dollar (USD), 215–24
Currency substitution model, 55–7
Currency supply and demand, 38
Currency trade selection, 208–9
CurrencyShares (ETF), 16
Current account deﬁcit, 29, 216
Current account surplus, 242
Current accounts deﬁcit and
nonperforming loans, 30–31
Customizable leverage, 6–7
Czech Republic, 35
Daily charts, 109–11, 124, 129
Daily trading volume, 1
Day Trading the Currency Market
(Lein), 59
Dealing stations in interbank market,
19
Decreasing implied volatility, 100
Deﬁcits, 47
Denmark, 33
Derivative products, 13
Deutesche mark (DM), 26
Dollar driven theory, 55
Dollar Index, 221
Dollar/gold convertibility, 23
Drought effects, 258–9, 265–6
ECB minimum bid rate (REPO Rate),
228


--- PAGE 295 ---
Index
279
Economic data changes with time,
62–3
Economic indicators for the United
States:
Consumer Conﬁdence Survey, 224
consumer price index (CPI), 222
employment cost index (ECI), 223
employment-nonfarm payrolls, 222
gross domestic product (GDP), 223
Industrial Production Index, 224
Institute for Supply Management
(ISM) (Formerly NAPM), 223
international trade, 223
producer price index (PPI), 222–3
Retail Sales Index, 224
Treasury International Capital Flow
Data (TIC Data), 224
Economic overview, broad:
Australian Dollar (AUD), 254
British Pound (GBP), 233–4
Canadian Dollar (CAD), 267–8
Euro (EUR), 224–6
Japanese Yen (JPY), 247–53
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 260–261
U.S. Dollar (USD), 215–17
Economic releases, 59–62
Electronic Brokering Services (EBS),
18
Electronic brokering systems, 18
Electronic communication networks
(ECNs), 5
Emerging markets, 220
Emotional detachment, 107–8
Employment, 253
Employment cost index (ECI), 223
Employment situation, 239–40
Employment-nonfarm payrolls, 222
Energy price correlation, 239
Energy prices, 270
Entering and exiting skills,
210–211
Equities market attributes, 4–5
Equities used to trade FX:
about, 200–201
correlation between Nikkei and
Dow, 201–2
correlation between Nikkei and
USD/JPY, 202
correlation between USD/JPY and
Dow, 202–3
Equity markets:
capital ﬂows, 47–8
portfolio ﬂows, 40
ESignal (commercial software), 211
Establishment Survey, 222
Estonia, 35
EU tax evaders, 245
Euribor futures, 41
Euro (EUR):
vs. British Pound (GBP), 234–5
broad economic overview, 224–6
European Central Bank (ECB),
225–6
European Monetary Union (EMU),
225
important characteristics of, 228–30
important indicators for Euro,
230–233
leading export markets, 225–6
leading import markets, 226
Euro, important characteristics of:
Euro sentiment, 230
Eurobor rate (euro interbank offer
rate), 230
Euro/USD cross currency pair
liquidity, 228–9
important indicators for, 230–231
unique risks of, 229–30
Euro, important indicators for:
German Industrial Production, 231
Inﬂation Indicators, 231–3
preliminary GDP, 230–231
Euro adoption arguments, 235
Euro introduction, 33–5
Euro sentiment, 230
Eurobor rate (euro interbank offer
rate), 230
European Central Bank (ECB), 10, 33
ECB minimum bid rate (REPO
Rate), 228
EMU criteria, 227
Euro (EUR), 225–6


--- PAGE 296 ---
280
INDEX
European Central Bank (ECB) (cont.)
open market operations,
227–8
European Currency Unit (ECU), 27
European Monetary System, 3
European Monetary System (EMS), 27
European Monetary Union (EMU):
Euro (EUR), 225
members of, 33
European Monetary Union (EMU)
criteria, 227
European session (London), 71–3
European Union countries, 224–5
Eurosterling futures, 238
Euro/USD cross currency pair
liquidity, 228–9
Eurozone interventions, 199–200
EUR/USD and corporate proﬁtability,
2
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), 3,
27
Exchange rate vs. bank rate, 268
Exchange traded funds (ETFs), 16
Execution quality, FX vs. futures,
12–13
Existing or completed trades,
96–8
Faders:
examples of, 130–132
further optimization, 130
strategy rules, 129–30
Fading the double zeros, 115–20
about, 115–16
examples of, 117–20
further optimizations, 117
market conditions, 117
strategy rules, 116–17
False breakouts, 125, 129
Familiarity with trading strategy,
212–13
Federal funds target, 218
Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC), 120, 217
Fibonacci retracement levels, 93
Filtering false breakouts:
examples of, 133–5
strategy rules, 132–3
Financial Services Authority (FSA)
guidelines, 251
Finland, 33
First target alteration, 162
Fiscal policy, 34, 218
Fiscal policy measures, 262
Fiscal Responsibility Act, 261
Fisher, Irving, 27
Fixed income markets:
capital ﬂows, 48
portfolio ﬂows, 40
Floating loss, 213
Floating pegs, 219
Foreign direct investment, 39, 47, 216
Foreign exchange (FX):
market key attributes, 4, 10
volatility, 60
Foreign exchange (FX) market vs.
futures and equities, 3–13
FX vs. equities, 4–5
Foreign exchange (FX) spot see spot:
Foreign exchange (FX) trading
methods:
about, 13
exchange traded funds (ETFs), 16
futures, 14–15
options, 15–16
spot, 14
Foreign exchange (FX) vs. equities:
around-the-clock 24-hour market,
5–6
customizable leverage, 6–7
equities market attributes, 4–5
FX market key attributes, 4
slippage, 7–8
stocks vs. countries, 8–10
technical analysis, 8
trading curbs or uptick rules, 7
trading error rates, 7
transaction costs, 6
Foreign exchange (FX) vs. futures,
10–11
execution quality and speed/low
error rates, 12–13


--- PAGE 297 ---
Index
281
futures attributes, 10–11
FX market key attributes, 10
market hours and liquidity, 11
no limit up or down rules/proﬁt in
both bull and bear markets, 12
transaction costs, 11–12
Foreign reserve assets, 226
Forex see foreign exchange (FX):
Forwards, 13
France, 33, 120
Free market capitalism, 23–4
Free Trade Agreement, 267
Fundamental analysis:
about, 38–9
capital and trade ﬂows, 39–42
currency movement, long term,
38–44
vs. technical analysis, 37, 45, 208
Fundamental trading strategies:
bond spreads as a leading indicator,
185–8
commodity prices as a leading
indicator, 180–185
equities used to trade FX, 200–203
interventions, 195–200
leveraged carry trade, 168–76
macroeconomic event awareness,
176–80
option volatilities to time market
movements, 191–5
picking the strongest pairing, 165–8
risk reversals, 189–91
trading the correlation with
fundamentals, 203–4
trading the correlation with
technicals, 204–5
Futures, 13–15
Futures attributes, FX vs. futures,
10–11
FX (foreign exchange) see foreign
exchange (FX):
FXCM Speculative Sentiment Index
(FXCM SSI), 155
G-7 Meeting, Dubai, September 2003,
177
GBP crosses, 239
GBP/USD liquidity, 236–7
GDP price deﬂator, 246
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), 22
German Bund, 230
German Industrial Production, 231
German unemployment, 232
Germany, 33, 120
Gold, 181–2, 219, 267, 269
Greece, 33
Gross domestic product (GDP), 8–9,
10, 50, 63
Australia, 259
Canada, 271–2
Japan, 253
New Zealand, 266
Switzerland, 246–7
United Kingdom, 240
United States, 223
Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP), 227, 231
Hausen, Robert A., 81
Hedge fund manager trading:
about, 207–8
entering and exiting skills, 210–211
familiarity with trading strategy,
212–13
self-reﬂection, 213–14
test drive (back-testing), 211–12
trading strategy deﬁned, 208–10
Hedge fund trading strategy deﬁned:
currency trade selection, 208–9
fundamental or technical, 208
time frame selection, 209–10
Hierarchy of participants in
decentralized market, 18–19
High-probability turn strategy, 155–64
about, 155–6
currency pairs choice, 161–2
examples of, 159–61
ﬁrst target alteration, 162
seven day (plus) moves, 162–4
six day moves, 162
strategy rules, 157–9


--- PAGE 298 ---
282
INDEX
Historical events:
Asian ﬁnancial crisis, 30–33
Bank of England failure, 27–9
Bretton Woods Conference, 21–3
Euro introduction, 33–5
free market capitalism, 23–4
George Soros, 27–9
Plaza Accord, 24–7
Hong Kong, 67, 219
Hourly charts, 112–13
Household Survey, 222
Housing market bubble, 62
Hungary, 35
Identifying risk reversals, 189
IFO (Information and Forschung
[research]) Survey, 232–3
Important characteristics:
of British Pound (GBP), 236–9
of Euro (EUR), 228–30
The Incredible January Effect: The
Stock Market’s Unsolved Mystery
(Hausen and Lakonishok), 81
Indicators:
intraday range trade, 103
medium-term breakout trade, 104
medium-term range trade, 103
medium-term trend trade, 103–4
Indonesia, 29, 31
Industrial production (IP):
Japan, 253
United Kingdom, 240
United States, 224
Inﬂation, 24
Inﬂation Indicators:
EU Harmonized Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP), 231
German Unemployment, 232
IFO (Information and Forschung
[research]) Survey, 232–3
important indicators for Euro, 231–3
individual country budget deﬁcits,
232
M3, 232
Inﬂation Report (MPC), 236
Inﬂation target, 242, 268
Inside breakout plan, 124–9
about, 124–5
examples of, 126–9
further optimizations, 125–6
strategy rules, 125
Inside day, 124
Inside day strategy, 209
Institute for Supply Management
(ISM) (Formerly NAPM), 223
Interbank market, 18
Interest Rare Parity Theory, 27
Interest rate differentials, 185–8
Australian Dollar, 259
calculations and currency pairs, 188
Canadian Dollar, 270–271
between gilts and foreign bonds, 238
New Zealand Dollar, 264–5
Swiss Franc, 244–5
U.S. Dollar, 220–221
Interest rate parity, 51
Interest rates, 9–10
International capital ﬂows, 49
International economic instability, 21
International government bonds, 41
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 22
International Securities Exchange
(ISE), 15
International trade, 223
Interventions, 195–200
about, 195–6
Eurozone, 199–200
Japan, 196–9
Intraday range trade, 103
indicators, 103
rules, 103
Intraday trading, 115
Ireland, 33
ISM Nonmanufacturing, 59
Italy, 33
January seasonality, 82–5
Japan:
banking crisis in, 31–2
ﬁscal year of, 84
interventions, 196–9
trading hours, 67


--- PAGE 299 ---
Index
283
Japanese Yen, important
characteristics of:
Bank of Japan intervention
practices., 250–251
banking stocks, 252
carry trade effects, 252
JPY movements are sensitive to
time., 251–2
proxy for Asian strength/weakness.,
250
Japanese Yen, important economic
indicators for:
balance of payments, 253
employment, 253
gross domestic product (GDP), 253
industrial production, 253
Tankan Survey, 253
Japanese Yen (JPY), 26, 31
broad economic overview, 247–53
currency proﬁles and unique
characteristics, 247–53
important characteristics of
Japanese Yen, 250–252
important economic indicators for
Japan, 252–4
Japan’s bubble burst, 248–9
leading export markets, 247–8
leading import markets, 248
Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Makers—Bank of Japan, 249–50
Japan’s bubble burst, 248–9
JPY movements are sensitive to time,
251–2
KoF Leading Indicators, 246
Lakonishok, Josef, 81
Lamont, Norman, 28
Large Value Transfer System (LVTS),
269
Latvia, 35
Leading export markets:
Australian Dollar (AUD), 254
British Pound (GBP), 233–4
Canadian Dollar (CAD), 267–8
Euro (EUR), 225–6
Japanese Yen (JPY), 247–8
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 261
Swiss Franc, 241
U.S. Dollar (USD), 217
Leading import markets:
British Pound (GBP), 234
Canadian Dollar (CAD), 268
Euro (EUR), 226
Japanese Yen (JPY), 248
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 261
Swiss Franc, 241–2
U.S. Dollar (USD), 217
Lend–Lease Act, 21
Leveraged carry trade, 168–76
carry trade considerations, 174–6
carry trade failures, 172–3
carry trade operations, 170–171
carry trade optimization, 171–2
carry trade workings, 169–70
risk aversion, 173–4
risk levels, 172
Limit rules, FX vs. futures, 12
London, 68
London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR), 3
Low-interest-rate currency
appreciation, 175
Luxembourg, 33
M3 (money supply), 227, 232
Maastricht Treaty, 227
Maastricht Treaty convergence
criteria, 35
MACD histogram, 128
Macroeconomic event awareness,
176–80
Managed risk, 106
Margin deposit, 6
Mark Twain effect, 81
Market conditions, 117
Market hours and liquidity, FX vs.
futures, 11
Market makers, 16
Market structure, 115
Market-moving indicators for U.S.
dollar, 61–2


--- PAGE 300 ---
284
INDEX
May seasonality, 87–8
Medium-term breakout trade:
indicators, 104
rules, 104
trading time horizon determination,
104
Medium-term range trade:
indicators, 103
rules, 103
trading time horizon determination,
103
Medium-term trend trade:
indicators, 103–4
rules, 104
trading time horizon determination,
103–4
Merger and acquisition activity, 245
Merger and acquisitions, 270
Meta Trader (commercial software),
211
Millionaire Traders: How Everyday
People Beat Wall Street at Its
Own Game, 208, 210
Ministry of Finance (MOF), 248
Model funds, 44
Models for forecasting currencies,
46–57
Momentum consistent with trend
direction, 102
Momentum funds, 44
Monetary and ﬁscal policy makers-
The Federal Reserve, 217–18
federal funds target, 218
open market operations, 218
Monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of Canada:
bank rate, 269
central bank goals, 268–9
open market operations, 269
Monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of England (BOE),
235–6
Monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Bank of Japan, 249–50
Open Market Operations,
249–50
Monetary and ﬁscal policy
makers-Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA):
cash rate, 256
central bank’s goals, 255
monetary policy meetings, 257–8
open market operations, 256–7
Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Makers-Swiss National Bank:
Swiss Franc, 242
Swiss National Bank, 242–3
Monetary and ﬁscal policy-Bank of
New Zealand:
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 261–3
objectives for ﬁscal policy, 262–3
ofﬁcial cash rate, 262
Monetary Conditions Index, 268
Monetary model, 51–3
limitations of, 52–3
use of, 52
Monetary policy, 33–4, 52, 269
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC),
235
Monetary policy decisions, 255
Monetary policy meetings, 257–8
Monetary Policy Report (BOC), 269
Monetary Policy Report (FED), 217
Money management rule, 152
Monthly Bulletin (SNB), 242
Monthly Economic Report (BOJ), 249
Monthly Report (BOJ), 249
Moving average
convergence/divergence (MACD),
102, 150
Moving averages, 102
Multiple entries, multiple exits
strategy, 211
Multiple entries, single exit strategy,
210–211
Multiple time frame analysis, 109–15
daily charts, 109–11
examples of, 109–10
hourly charts, 112–13
value of, 113, 115
Net exporters, 41–2


--- PAGE 301 ---
Index
285
the Netherlands, 33
New York Commodities Exchange
(COMEX), 11
New York Mercantile Exchange, 11
New Zealand Dollar, important
characteristics of:
carry trades, 263–4
commodity-linked currency, 263
drought effects, 265–6
interest rate differentials, 264–5
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 263–6
population migration, 265
strong correlation with AUD, 263
New Zealand Dollar, important
economic indicators for:
balance of goods and services, 266
consumer price index (CPI), 266
gross domestic product (GDP), 266
New Zealand Dollar (NZD), 266–7
private consumption, 266
producer price index (PPI), 266–7
New Zealand Dollar (NZD):
broad economic overview, 260–261
important characteristics of New
Zealand Dollar, 263–6
important economic indicators for
the New Zealand, 266–7
leading export markets, 261
leading import markets, 261
monetary and ﬁscal policy-Bank of
New Zealand, 261–3
New Zealand dollars, 87–9
News release trading:
about, 139–41
examples of, 142–50
strategy rules for proactive and
reactive trading, 146–7
strategy rules for proactive trading,
141–2
strategy rules for reactive trading,
144–5
technical trading strategies,
139–50
Next best order system, 8
Nikkei and U.S. Dollar, 2–3
Nixon, Richard, 22–3
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), 267
November seasonality, 89
Objectives for ﬁscal policy, 262–3
OECD Purchasing Power Parity Index,
50–51
Ofﬁcial cash rate, 262
Oil, 181–4, 233, 267, 269
O’Neill, Paul, 218
Online currency trading, 1
Online trading platform, 18
Open market operations, 218
Bank of Canada, 269
Bank of Japan, 249–50
British Pound (GBP), 236
European Central Bank (ECB),
227–8
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA),
256–7
Swiss National Bank, 243
Option volatilities to time market
movements, 191–5
about, 191–2
rules, 192
rules, beneﬁts from, 194
rules, workings of, 192–3
volatility tracking, 194–5
Options, 13, 15–16
Options (risk reversals), 102
Order ﬂow, 115
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
(OECD), 260
Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), 24
Parabolic stop and reversal (SAR)
method, 106–7
Perfect order:
about, 138–9
examples of, 139–40
rules for, 139
Philadelphia Stock Exchange, 15
the Philippines, 29
Physical ﬂows, 39–40


--- PAGE 302 ---
286
INDEX
Picking the strongest pairing, 165–8
Placing methods, 106–7
Players in the FX market:
about, 16–17
centralized markets, 17–18
dealing stations in interbank market,
19
hierarchy of participants in
decentralized market, 18–19
Plaza Accord, 24–7
Poland, 35
Political uncertainty, 178–9
Population, 265
Population migration, 265
Portfolio ﬂows:
capital and trade ﬂows, 40
equity markets, 40
ﬁxed income markets, 40
Portugal, 33
Positive/negative correlations, 76–7
Potential changes in banking
regulations, 245
Preliminary GDP, 230–231
Private consumption:
Australia, 260
New Zealand, 266
Producer price index (PPI), 10
Australia, 260
Canada, 272
New Zealand, 266–7
United States, 222–3
Production index (industrial
production), 247
Psychological outlook, 107–8
Purchasing Managers Index (PMI), 240
Purchasing power parity (PPP) theory,
49–51
Purchasing power parity theory:
basket of goods, 50
Big Mac index, 50
OECD Purchasing Power Parity
Index, 50–51
Quantum hedge fund, 28
Quarterly Bulletin (MPC), 236
Quarterly Bulletin (SNB), 242
Range trading, 109, 209
ADX (Average Directional Index)
less than 20, 99–100
decreasing implied volatility, 100
risk reversal identiﬁcation, 101
risk reversals ﬂipping between calls
and puts, 100–101
trading environment proﬁle, 99–104
Reagan, Ronald, 24
Real interest rate differential model,
53–4
about, 53–4
limitations of, 54
Real-time, streaming prices, 13
Real-time, two-way quotes, 7–8
Relative Strength Index (RSI), 93, 102
Repo rate, 238
Repo rate (ECB minimum bid rate),
228
Repo transactions, 243, 250
Reserve Bank Bulletin (RBA),
257
Resistance in trends, 45
Retail price index (RPI), 240
Retail price index (RPIX), 235
Retail sales, 247
Retail Sales Index, 224
Reuters, 18
Risk aversion, 173–4
Risk levels, 172
Risk management, 104–7
about, 104–7
risk-reward ratio, 105
stop-loss orders, 105–7
Risk reversals, 189–91
described, 100–101
examples of, 190–101
identifying, 101, 189
use of, 189–90
Risk-reward ratio, 105
Round numbers, 115
Rules:
intraday range trade, 103
medium-term breakout trade, 104
medium-term range trade, 103
medium-term trend trade, 104


--- PAGE 303 ---
Index
287
Safe havens, 219, 241, 243–4
Schlossberg, Boris, 214
Seasonality, 81–90
about, 81–2
incorporating into trading, 89–90
in January, 82–5
in May, 87–8
in November, 89
in September, 88
in summer, 85–7
Self-reﬂection, 213–14
September seasonality, 88
Seven day (plus) moves, 162–4
Short-term market moves:
beneﬁtting from knowledge of, 63–5
economic data changes with time,
62–3
economic releases, 59–62
gross domestic product (GDP), 63
market-moving indicators for U.S.
dollar, 61–2
Short-term momentum strategy
(20-100), 150–155
about, 150–151
examples of, 151–5
strategy rules, 151
Simple moving averages (SMAs), 93,
102, 136
Singapore, 67
Single-entry, multiple exits strategy,
210
Single-entry, single exit strategy, 210
Six day moves, 162
Slippage, 7–8
Smithsonian Agreement, 22–4
Soros, George, 3, 27–9
South Korea, 29
Spain, 33
Specialists, 16
Speculation, 237–8
Speculative positions, 251
Spot, 13–14
Spreads, 11
Stagﬂation, 24
Steinhardt, Michael, 43
Sterling see British Pound (GBP):
Stochastics, 102
Stock and bond market impacts, 221–2
Stocks and bonds, effects of
currencies on, 1–3
Stocks vs. countries, 8–10
Stop-loss orders, 115–16
about, 105–6
to manage risk, 106
parabolic stop and reversal (SAR)
method, 106–7
placing methods, 106–7
two-day low method, 106
Strategy rules:
faders, 129–30
fading the double zeros, 116–17
ﬁltering false breakouts, 132–3
high-probability turn strategy, 157–9
inside breakout plan, 125
for proactive and reactive trading,
146–7
for proactive trading, 141–2
for reactive trading, 144–5
short-term momentum strategy
(20-100), 151
waiting for real deal, 121–4
Strong dollar policy, 218
Summer seasonality, 85–7
Sweden, 33
Swiss Franc:
currency proﬁles and unique
characteristics, 241–7
leading export markets, 241
leading import markets, 241–2
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers,
242
Swiss National Bank, 242–3
Swiss Franc, important characteristics
of, 243–7
carry trades effects, 244
correlation with gold, 244
interest rate differentials, 244–5
merger and acquisition activity.,
245
potential changes in banking
regulations., 245
safe haven status, 243–4


--- PAGE 304 ---
288
INDEX
Swiss Franc, important characteristics
of (cont.)
trading behavior, cross-currency
characteristics., 245
Swiss Franc, important economic
indicators for:
balance of payments, 247
consumer price index (CPI), 246
gross domestic product (GDP),
246–7
KoF (Konjunkturforschungsstelle
der eth, Zurich) Leading
Indicators, 246
production index (industrial
production), 247
retail sales, 247
Swiss LIBOR rate, 243
Swiss National Bank (SNB), 242
central bank’s goals, 242–3
central bank’s tools, 243
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers,
242–3
Open Market Operations, 243
Swiss Franc, 242–3
Target Interest Rate Range, 243
Synthetic currencies, 19
Tankan Survey, 253
Target Interest Rate Range, 243
Tech bubble in United States, 41
Technical analysis:
about, 44–5
vs. fundamental analysis, 45
FX vs. equities, 8
Technical analysis tools, 45
Technical trading strategies:
channel strategy, 135–8
faders, 129–32
fading the double zeros, 115–20
ﬁltering false breakouts, 132–5
high-probability turn strategy,
155–64
inside breakout plan, 124–9
multiple time frame analysis, 109–15
news release trading, 139–50
perfect order, 138–40
short-term momentum strategy
(20-100), 150–155
waiting for real deal, 120–124
Test drive (back-testing), 211–12
Thailand, 29, 31
Time frame selection, 209–10
Time horizon, 176
Tokyo, 67
Toolbox, 98–9
Top picking, 155–6
Trade balances, 175–6
Trade deﬁcit, 42
Trade ﬂow balance, 48
Trade ﬂows, 241
balance of payments theory, 47
capital and trade ﬂows, 41–2
Trade parameters, 93
Trade parameters for different market
conditions, 91–108
Trades waiting for list, 95–6
TradeStation (commercial software),
211
Trading behavior, cross-currency
characteristics, 245
Trading curbs or uptick rules, FX vs.
equities, 7
Trading environment proﬁle:
range trading, 99–104
trend trading, 101–2
Trading error rates:
FX vs. equities, 7
FX vs. futures, 12–13
Trading examples:
channel strategy, 136–8
faders, 130–132
fading the double zeros, 117–20
ﬁltering false breakouts, 133–5
high-probability turn strategy,
159–61
inside breakout plan, 126–9
news release trading, 142–50
perfect order, 139–40
short-term momentum strategy
(20-100), 151–5
waiting for real deal, 121–4
Trading high (emotion), 140


--- PAGE 305 ---
Index
289
Trading hours:
Asian session (Tokyo), 67–9
European session (London), 71–3
U.S. session (New York), 70–71
U.S.-Asian overlap, 74
U.S.-European overlap, 74
Trading journal:
currency pair checklist, 92–5
existing or completed trades, 96–8
trade parameters for different
market conditions, 91–8
trades waiting for list, 95–6
Trading opportunity, 184–5
Trading rules, 108
Trading strategy, 110, 208–10
Trading strategy development, 207
Trading strategy familiarity:
understanding drawdown, 212–13
understanding performance, 212
Trading time horizon determination:
about, 102
intraday range trade, 103
medium-term breakout trade, 104
medium-term range trade, 103
medium-term trend trade, 103–4
Trading volumes:
of European currencies, 120
of Switzerland, 120
of United States, 120
Trailing stops, 118
Transaction costs:
FX vs. equities, 6
FX vs. futures, 11–12
Treasuries and FX bonds, 221
Treasury International Capital Flow
Data (TIC Data), 224
Treasury international capital ﬂow
(TIC), 38–9
Trend following, 209
Trend trading, 109
ADX (Average Directional Index)
less than 20, 102
momentum consistent with trend
direction, 102
options (risk reversals), 102
trading environment proﬁle, 101–2
Trends, 45
Triple zero levels, 119
24-hour Market, 5–6
Two-day low method, 106
U.K. housing starts, 240
Understanding drawdown, 212–13
Understanding performance, 212
Unemployment, 271
Unique risks of Euro (EUR), 229–30
United Kingdom, 33
Euro adoption arguments, 235
ﬁve economic tests for the Euro,
234–5
politicians’ impact on Euro, 238–9
trading volumes of, 120
United Kingdom, important economic
indicators for:
British Pound (GBP), 239–41
employment situation, 239–40
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 240
industrial production (IP), 240
Purchasing Managers Index (PMI),
240
retail price index (RPI), 240
U.K. housing starts, 240
United Kingdom joins Exchange Rate
Mechanism, 27–8
United States:
consumer price index (CPI), 222
important economic indicators for,
222–4
Institute for Supply Management
(ISM) (Formerly NAPM), 223
tech bubble in, 41
trading volumes of, 120
U.S Dollar Index, 221
U.S. dollar strength, 216
U.S. Dollar (USD):
broad economic overview, 215–17
currency deal usage, 219
Dollar Index, 221
and emerging markets, 220
important characteristics of, 219–22
interest rate differentials, 220–221
leading export markets, 217


--- PAGE 306 ---
290
INDEX
U.S. Dollar (USD) (cont.)
leading import markets, 217
market-moving indicators for,
61–2
monetary and ﬁscal policy makers-
The Federal Reserve, 217–18
relationship with gold, 219
as safe haven, 219
stock and bond market impacts,
221–2
Treasuries and FX bonds, 221
U.S. Federal Reserve (FED), 10
U.S. non-farm payroll releases,
60
U.S. session (New York),
70–71
U.S. Treasury, 218
U.S. War in Iraq, 179–80
U.S.-Asian overlap, 74
U.S.-European overlap, 74
Value of multiple time frame analysis,
113, 115
Variant perception, 43
Volatility tracking, 194–5
Volcker, Paul, 24
Waiting for real deal, 120–124
about, 120–121
examples of, 121–4
strategy rules, 121–4
Wars, 179–80
Weekend positions, 209–10
World Bank, 22
Yen example, 56–7


--- PAGE 307 ---
SECOND EDITION
DAY TRADING & SWING TRADING the CURRENCY MARKET
Praise for the First Edition
“I thought this was one of the best books that I had read on FX. The book should 
be required reading not only for traders new to the foreign exchange markets, 
but also for seasoned professionals. I’ll deﬁ nitely be keeping it on my desk for 
reference. The book is very readable and very educational. In fact, I wish that 
Kathy’s book had been around when I had ﬁ rst started out in FX. It would have 
saved me from a lot of heartache from reading duller books, and would have 
saved me a lot of time from having to learn things the hard way. I look forward to 
reading other books from her in the future.”
—Farooq Muzammal, Head of Foreign Exchange, MAREX Capital
“Kathy’s book is an indispensable tool for Forex traders, whether you are a pro-
fessional or novice. It not only lays the groundwork for an in-depth understanding 
of Forex trading, it also contains numerous fundamental and technical strategies
. . . . I suspect that many traders will be keeping Kathy’s book within arm’s reach 
for many years to come.”
—Eddie Kwong, Executive VP/Editor in Chief, Tradingmarkets.com
“In Day Trading the Currency Market, Kathy Lien provides traders with unique, 
thoughtful, and proﬁ table insight on trading this exciting market. This book 
should be required reading for all traders, whether they are novices to Forex or 
experienced professionals.”
—Cory Janssen, cofounder, Investopedia.com
“There are aspects to trading currencies that are different from trading equities, 
options, or futures. In this book, Kathy Lien provides deep insight into all the 
mechanisms that take place in the currency markets. Any currency trader will 
gain more conﬁ dence in their trading after reading this book.”
—Jayanthi Gopalakrishnan, Editor, 
Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities
“Kathy has done a brilliant job with this book. She speaks directly to traders 
and gives them guidance to improve their performance as Forex traders. I took 
some notes and ideas from the book myself that are going to be very useful for 
my business.”
—Francesc Riverola, CEO and founder, FXstreet.com
