--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
Interviews with America's
Top Stock Traders
Jack D. Schwager
HarperBusiness
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPwWuAm


--- PAGE 3 ---
While the methods of investment described in this book are believed to be effective
there is no guarantee that the methods will be profitable in specific applications, owing
to the risk that is involved in investing of almost any kind. Moreover, readers are
specifically advised that the author may invest in certain of the traders about which he is
writing (or has written) and/or may be affiliated with hedge fund(s) that so invest with
such persons or entities. Neither the publisher nor the author assumes liability for any
losses that may be sustained by the use of the method described in this book, and/or
this potential conflict of interest, and any such liability is hereby expressly disclaimed.
STOCK MARKET WIZARDS. Copyright © 2001 by Jack D. Schwager.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles and reviews. For information address HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.,
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. For information please write: Special Markets Department,
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
FIRST EDITION
Designed lay Fearn Cutler
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schwager, Jack D., 1948-
Stock market wizards : interviews with America's top stock traders / by Jack D.
Schwager.
p. 
cm.
ISBN 0-06-662058-9
1. Stockbrokers—United States—Interviews. 2. Investment advisors—United
States—Interviews. 3. Floor traders (Finance)—United States—Interviews.
4. Futures market—United States. 
5. Financial futures—United States. 
I. Title.
HG4621 .S2862001
337. 64'0973—dc21
00-058154
In memory of my mother, Margaret Schwager, loved by all
who knew her for her kindness, empathy, and sincerity.
and
In memory of my brother, Kerwin Farkas, deeply loved by
family and many friends whose support never waned_
a reflection of a life well lived.


--- PAGE 4 ---
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments «
Prologue: An Inauspicious Beginning \i
Stuart Walton:
>" Back from the Abyss
Michael Lauer:
> The Wisdom of Value, the Folly of Fad
Steve Watson:
> Dialing for Dollars
Dana Galante:
^ Against the Current
Mark D. Cook:
>«• Harvesting S&P Profits
Alphonse "Buddy" Fletcher Jr.:
>• Win-Win Investing
Ahmet Okumus:
* Frow Istanbul to Wall Street Bull
Mark Minervini:
> Stock Around the Clock
30
54
75
95
127
169
148


--- PAGE 5 ---
Steve Lescarbeau:
h- The Ultimate Trading System
Michael Masters:
*• Swimming Through the Markets
John Bender:
!*> Questioning the Obvious
Claudio Guazzoni:
t- Eliminating the Downside
David Shaw:
]»• The Quantitative Edge
Steve Cohen:
DO The Trading Room /~»;<$ t
Ari Kiev, M.D.:
^ The Mind of a Winner
Wizard Lessons
Appendix: Options—Understanding the Basics
Index
]89
207
22J
239
254
275
288
298
327
33J
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Although I found most of the traders in this book through personal contacts
in the industry, several money manager databases and texts provided
helpful references. In particular, I would cite the following:
Barclay MAP for Windows. This software program, which is updated
monthly, allows searches of an impressively large database of hedge
fund managers. The program is highly intuitive and permits the in-
vestor to extract and rank those trading programs that meet multiple
user-defined criteria. (Barclay Trading Group: [641] 472-3456; www.
barclaygrp.com.)
Van Hedge Fund Advisors International Inc. (VAN). A hedge fund
advisory service that compiles its own hedge fund indexes and main-
tains one of the largest hedge fund databases. The company provided
me with the results of a computer search of hedge fund managers meet-
ing my extremely restrictive set of criteria. ([615] 661-4748; www.
hedgefund .com.)
The CTA Report. A quarterly comprehensive compendium of CTA
performance results, containing a well-designed two-page layout of tables
and charts for each CTA. There is also an easy-to-use Web site for
monthly updates. As the name implies, this service covers managers who
specialize in futures trading; only a small portion of these managers focus
on equity derivatives. (International Traders Research, Inc.: [858] 459-
0818; www. managedfutures. com.)
The U.S. Offshore Funds Directory. An annual publication that con-


--- PAGE 6 ---
A C K N 0 1
IM
tains one-page summaries and annual returns for over 700 offshore
hedge funds. There is also a web link for updates. ([212] 371-5935; www.
hedgefundnews .com)
When I began my search for traders worthy of inclusion in this vol-
ume, my first call was to Doug Makepeace. He has built a career on find-
ing and investing his own and client funds with exceptional traders. Doug
was most generous in sharing information with me, even though doing so
threatened his ability to invest additional funds with these traders in the
future if they became too well known.
Tom DeMark, a renowned technical analyst whose indicators are fea-
tured on many of the country's leading financial data services, was partic-
ularly vigorous in his efforts to help me find traders for this book. Tom is
in a good position to provide such assistance, holding the unofficial world
record as the technical analyst who has worked for the most (four) Mar-
ket Wizards or their organizations.
Marty Schwartz and Linda Raschke were two former Market Wizards
("former" referring to the books in which their interviews appeared, not
their trading talent) who helped me find new Market Wizards for this
book.
Other industry contacts who were particularly helpful in aiding my
search for great trading talent include: Sol Waksman and George Van; Bob
Morris, Andy Good, Tony Cimirusti, Loran Fleckenstein, and Jason Perl.
I find it extremely difficult to evaluate the writing quality of any book
I am working on. I lose all sense of perspective. For this reason, it is
invaluable to have someone to provide objective feedback as the book is
being written. Enter my wife, Jo Ann, who read the final draft of each
chapter as soon as it was completed. Her promptness in performing this
task was not a reflection of her eagerness to read the material—in fact,
few topics interest her less than the financial markets—but rather a res-
ignation to the inevitable in the face of my unrelenting nagging. ("Have
you read it yet?") Jo Ann provided honest comments—sometimes brutally
so—and very helpful suggestions, nearly all of which were accepted.
Whatever the defects of this book in its final form, I can only assure the
reader they would have been that much worse without Jo Ann's input.
PROLOGUE
An Inauspicious Beginning
Men are from Mars because they missed the flight to Venus. When to leave
for the airport has always been a subject that my wife and I have viewed
from different perspectives—my view: late enough to make it exciting;
my wife's view: early enough to allow for a traffic jam, a flat tire, airport
shopping, and a full course meal before the flight.
For years I left for airports without allowing for any spare time and
never missed a flight. About eighteen months ago, I moved to Martha's
Vineyard, where the travel time to the airport can be accurately estimated
because of the limited traffic off-season and because the airport is so
small—sort of like the one in the one in the old TV series Wings, only
smaller. (At least it was when I began this book; a new airport has since
opened.)
One morning, only a few months after we had moved to Martha's
Vineyard, my wife, Jo Ann, and I were scheduled to fly to Boston. I was so
cocky about the predictability of getting to the airport on time that I left
our house—approximately a twenty-minute drive away—only thirty-five
minutes before the scheduled departure time. The drive took a few min-
utes longer than expected, due to being stuck behind a slow driver on the
no-passing, single-lane road; I realized I had cut it just a little bit too
tight.
"We'll still make it," I assured my wife, "but we won't have much extra
time." She seemed skeptical—irrationally so, I thought. We pulled into
the airport entrance only ten minutes before flight time. Even though the
parking lot was only a stone's throw from the terminal, I dropped Jo Ann
at the entrance, saying, "Let them know we're here."
XI


--- PAGE 7 ---
When I returned about one minute later, I found Jo Ann standing out-
side waiting for me with a troubled expression. Confused to see her
there, I asked, "What's wrong?"
"The plane left," she said in a voice that was a cross between disap-
pointment and "I told you so."
"What do you mean, the plane left?" I asked, glancing at my watch,
even though I knew the exact time. "It's only eight minutes to ten."
I went into the terminal, angry that the small prop plane had left with-
out us before the scheduled time. "I don't get it," I said to the woman at
the airline counter, all prepared to be the aggrieved customer.
She couldn't have been nicer. "Our planes leave as soon as everyone is
here. Since we hadn't heard from you to tell us you were running late, we
assumed you weren't coming. If you had called, we would have held the
plane." And, you know, they would have, too; that's how Martha's Vine-
yard works. How could I be angry at anyone other than myself after that
explanation?
Fast-forward about six months—the beginning of the interview
process for this book. I am scheduled to catch the first flight on an intri-
cate itinerary that will take me to four states in four days for six inter-
views. This schedule has no leeway for missed flights.
Wiser from experience, I make sure to leave early for the airport,
allowing for plenty of extra time. On the drive there, Jo Ann, who is drop-
ping me off, notices that I have lint on my blue blazer. She offers the
helpful hint that I should ask the people at the airport counter for tape to
brush it off. We arrive about thirty minutes early. I pull up to the curb and
say good-bye to Jo Ann. After checking in and sitting for a while, I realize
1 have enough time to take care of my lint-laden jacket. I walk up to the
counter and obtain the necessary tape.
There are about a dozen people in the small waiting room. A few
moments later there is an announcement for my flight: "Now boarding
section one, seats one to eight." I pull out the red, plastic, envelope-size
boarding pass and notice that it is emblazoned with the number 11.
"How quaint," I muse, "that they would board such a small flight in two
sections." I sit down and return to my lint-removal project.
I'm sitting there absentmindedly, picking lint off my jacket. Suddenly
A N I N A U S P I C I O U S B E G I N N I N G
I snap back into reality. I realize that it must be at least five or ten min-
utes since they called for the boarding of the first group of passengers. I
look around the waiting area and, to my horror, I discover that it is virtu-
ally deserted. I jump up, run through the doors to the airstrip, and see a
small plane with propellers whirring. "Wait!" I yell, waving my arms fran-
tically as I rush toward the plane. I see my whole precisely orchestrated
trip—all four days, four states, and six interviews of it—unraveling on
the spot.
The airline attendant intercepts me. I flash my large red boarding
pass. "You're not going anywhere," he says firmly. At first I think he means
that it's too late and I missed the plane. But then he adds, "Your section
will be leaving in five minutes." That's when I learned that at the
Martha's Vineyard airport "sections" refer to different planes!
I slink back to my seat. The moment of panic having passed, my sense
of awareness returns, and I am able to appreciate completely the full
scope of my stupidity. The last time I felt that embarrassed I had just
asked an infrequently seen relative when she was "expecting," only to
learn subsequently that she had given birth two months earlier but had
obviously retained a good portion of the gained weight. Oops.
"Okay, okay," you're saying, "a slightly amusing anecdote—maybe—
but what does this have to do with trading or investing?" Simply this: If
you're too busy picking the lint off your jacket, you're liable to miss the
plane. In other words, don't get so caught up in the details that you miss
the big picture. Here are some examples of market myopia:
> a trader who does exhaustive research trying to identify the most
promising new technology companies but overlooks the fact that a 70
percent price rise in the sector during the past six months implies an
unusually high-risk investment environment
> a trader who scrutinizes a company's financial statements and reports
but fails to realize that the company's soaring profits have been due to
a single product whose future sales are threatened by the imminent
entry of new competitors
K a trader who is engrossed with finding better timing-entry methods
but virtually ignores such critical questions as: When and how will
positions be exited? How will risk be controlled?


--- PAGE 8 ---
All of these examples contain the same basic message: Maintain a
whole-picture perspective. Focus on the entire market and the sector, not
just the individual stock. Be attentive to qualitative factors, not just the
available quantitative information. Develop a trading plan that encom-
passes all the aspects of trading, not just the entry strategy.
STUART WALTON
Back from the Abyss
In June 1999, at the peak Of his career, after eight years establishing one of the.
most extraordinary stock trading track records of the 1990s, and with
$ 150 million under management, Stuart Walton returned all money to
his investors and walked away from trading completely. The emotional
repercussions of a marital breakup were interfering with his ability to
focus on trading, and he did not feel it was right to manage money until
he could once again devote "100 percent energy and enthusiasm" to the
task. In the preceding eight years, he had achieved an astounding 115
percent average annual compounded return in trading profits (92 percent
for his clients after deducting management fees), with annual returns
ranging from a high of 274 percent to a low of 63 percent (excluding the
1999 partial year).
Stuart Walton's career as a trader is marked by a string of contradic-
tions and paradoxes. He wanted to be an artist or a writer; he became a
trader. Though he valued academics and disdained the financial world,
the markets became his profession. He once hated trading so much that
he awoke feeling that he couldn't do it for another day and quit his job
that morning; several years later, the markets were his endeavor and pas-
sion. His initial forays into stock trading were marked by such ineptitude
that he nearly went bankrupt, yet he subsequently became so skilled that
he more than doubled his money annually.
I visited Walton, a Canadian expatriate, at his office in downtown San
Francisco. I discovered that, although managing a nine-digit sum, he had
no trading assistants, no back office staff, no marketing people, no pro-
grammers, not even a full-time secretary. His firm, Reindeer Capital,


--- PAGE 9 ---
consisted of Stuart Walton alone. His isolation was deliberate. After hav-
ing gone wrong so often by listening to tips and opinions, he had come to
realize the importance of not being influenced by others while trading.
Walton was relaxed and outgoing. We talked for five hours straight
without interruption. The time passed quickly.
Is there some significance to the name of the firm or are you just
partial to reindeer?
The firm is named after my great-grandfather, William Gladstone
Walton, who was given the nickname "Reindeer" for a famous trek he
conceived and led. Much of what I know about him I learned from
my grandfather, who passed away last year at the age of one hundred,
narrowly missing the feat of having lived in three separate centuries.
In 1892, at the age of twenty-three, Reindeer Walton lelt England to
work as a missionary in northern Canada. He typically traveled over
two thousand miles a year by canoe and dogsled, visiting his far-flung
constituency—the Indians and Eskimos that lived around the Arctic
Circle.
One year, vast forest fires swept through northern Quebec,
destroying almost all the region's vegetation and game, and leaving
the native population at the brink of starvation. Reindeer Walton
came up with the idea of herding the Siberian reindeer, which are
also called caribou, from Alaska to northern Quebec. Through sheer
perseverance, he convinced the Canadian government to finance the
trek, which he organized and led. It took him five years, from 1921 to
1925, to herd three thousand reindeer across northern Canada. Rein-
deer are not like cattle; they move only when they want to move, and
they go in all different directions.
How did he keep them herded together?
Caribou will follow the feeding path. He used a lot of foresight in
choosing the right route. He succeeded in getting three-quarters of
the herd to migrate; the remainder died or dispersed. His trek perma-
nently changed the migration patterns for Siberian reindeer. The por-
tion of the herd that survived flourished in northern Quebec, and he
became a local hero.
B A C K F R O M T H F A B Y S S
Is there some principle you wish to symbolize by the name, or is
it just a matter of honoring your great-grandfather?
I tell people that my great-grandfather added more value to society
than I ever will.
When did you first get involved in the markets?
As soon as I graduated from McGill University with an M.B.A. I orig-
inally wanted to be a cartoonist.
A cartoonist with an M.B.A.? Were you planning to be the
world's first business cartoonist?
No, the cartoonist ambitions came earlier. When I graduated from
college, I definitely wanted to be a cartoonist. 1 sat down with the
head of the art department, and he told me, "If you feel you know
how to draw and represent the human body as well as one of the mas-
ters of art history and are then prepared to make five dollars per hour
drawing cartoons, then this is definitely the career path for you." His
comments threw some cold water on my plans. I had also done some
writing in college, and a few of my short stories had been published. I
thought that journalism might be a good alternative career path that
allowed some creativity.
Your interests seem to be so strongly artistic. Why did you go for
an M.B.A.?
Because the journalism idea fell through as well, and I decided I
needed to earn a living.
What went wrong with journalism?
I applied to several journalism schools. That summer, while visiting
my parents, who were in Brazil at the time, I received a rejection call
from Carleton University, which was my first choice for a journalism
school. I received the call during a party. Maybe it was because I'd
had too many Brazilian caipirinhas, which is their rum concoction,
but I said to myself, "I guess this is another one of life's crossroads."
So I decided to give up the idea of becoming a journalist. I guess I
didn't want to do it badly enough to pursue it.
In retrospect, do you consider your rejection from journalism
school a lucky event?
I consider it a huge stroke of luck. My father always told me that I
had to differentiate between my hobbies and my career. I think he's


--- PAGE 10 ---
S T U A R T WALTQ*
right. My mother recently asked me if I had any regrets at not having
pursued any of these other interests. At first I said that I didn't,
because I was basking in the success I've had with this business, but
every day that goes by, I regret it more and more. Eventually, I can see
myself veering back.
Veering back to drawing or writing?
Maybe both, maybe neither. I always thought that the best way to
combine my interests in drawing and writing was films, particularly
short films. I have a lot of ideas already. Nothing that would be com-
mercial; stuff that probably would have an end audience of three peo-
ple in the world.
Have you ever made any films?
No, I would have to take a film course just to learn how to point the
camera.
Are you thinking of giving up trading in lieu of these other
interests?
I really admire people who do what they want to do and don't care
about anything else. I had a friend in college who was determined to
be a rock and roll star. He formed the band The Cowboy Junkies.
When he started college, he couldn't even play a guitar, and now he is
sold out at every concert. But I know myself. I like the comforts of
life, and for me this business is the best way to acquire them.
Although, eventually, I will probably pursue some of these other
interests, it's not something I see happening in the immediate future.
What happened after you were rejected from journalism school?
I decided to go for an M.B.A because I thought it was the best way to
get a job.
Did you give any thought to what you might do with your
M.B.A.?
I intended to go into advertising because it was the one business
career I thought might satisfy my creative side. But the opportunity
never arose. When I graduated, the economy in Canada was terrible.
There were only two jobs offered on campus. One was a manage-
ment trainee position with Lloyds Bank. The job appealed to me
because of the location: New York or London. I thought it would be
great to work in either of those two cities. I applied and got the job.
B A C K F R O M T H E A B Y S S
They sent me to a training program in New York. I spent most of the
training program in the foreign exchange trading room, which was a
fluke because I was supposed to be trained as a loan officer and sent
back to Canada.
So you fell into a trading environment entirely by chance.
That is one reason why I believe anyone can do this job; I don't think
you have to be born to do it.
I don't know about that. I can assure you that among the hun-
dreds of thousands of people who try trading, very few can even
remotely approach your track record. What was your job at the
foreign exchange desk?
I was just a flunky. I took customer orders and did other assorted
tasks. 1 had to be at work at 3:30 A.M.—which was brutal for a single
guy living in New York—to get everything ready for the traders. I
clipped newspaper articles for them and made sure their order tickets
were in place. It was a glorified gofer position.
Did you have any interest in financial markets at the time?
None at all. I was still wrapped up in the idealism of my previous aca-
demic life. I looked down on my M.B.A. My thoughts were, "What
happens to all the learning and academics I've done? Does it all just
get shoved away for the rest of my life?"
The job in the foreign exchange department didn't help matters at
all. If anything, it turned me off to trading because of all the day-to-
day friction. The job was my first introduction to Americans; I had
been surrounded by Canadians all my life. Canadians are more laid-
back; they are more concerned about etiquette than going for the
jugular or getting their point across. There were traders on the desk
who would just scream at me all the time. Most times, I didn't even
know why. Maybe it was because they needed someone to take it out
on when their positions went bad, or maybe it was because I didn't do
things quickly enough for them. I would go home every night upset
because someone had shouted at me.
How long did you stay at this job?
For about six months. I left because I found out through the
grapevine that I was about to be transferred to Toronto. At that point,
I loved living in New York, and I had also just met my wife-to-be and


--- PAGE 11 ---
S T U A R T W A L T O N
didn't want to leave her. Therefore, I took a job at the New York
branch of another Canadian company, Wood Gundy. One attraction
of the new job was that they offered to get me a green card; I had
been in the United States on a temporary visa.
What was the job you got?
It was a little bit less of a flunky job. I went through Wood Gundy's
training program and was placed on the equity desk. I was just an
order taker, which was very boring. The customer was making the
decision, and the floor broker was executing the trade; I was nothing
more than an intermediary. I always laugh when brokers on the sell
side of the stock business call themselves traders. Well they are not
traders; they are just order takers. None of them are taking positions
for the house or with their own money.
At that point, I made the first trade for my own account. My girl-
friend, who later became my wife, worked for Liz Claiborne. She kept
telling me how great her company was doing: "I don't even have to
call my customers, they're calling me." Since I didn't have any money
to invest, I called my father for a loan. "Dad," I said, "I have a great
idea; you just have to lend me some money." He loaned me $10,000,
and I put it all into Liz Claiborne stock. The stock quickly went up
three points, and I took my profits. But the worst thing you can do as
a beginning trader is to have your first trade work. Within three
weeks, I had lost not only all my profits from the Liz Claiborne trade,
but also all the money my father had lent me.
How did you do that?
I was so taken with the success of my first trade that I started listen-
ing to all sorts of tips and rumors. The guy delivering my coffee in the
morning could tell me about a stock, and I would buy it. I was
cleaned out in three weeks. It took me five years, a little bit at a time,
to pay back my father.
What did your father say when you told him you had lost the
money?
"Well, I thought that you would," he said, "but I appreciated that you
had an idea and wanted to follow through on it." Ironically, the Liz
Claiborne stock, for which I had originally borrowed the money, con-
tinued to go straight up, quintupling in a year.
What was your next trading experience?
The Wood Gundy equity desk was another version of New York verbal
abuse. Once again, I found myself at a job where the guys on the desk
were constantly yelling at me. It was just regular day-to-day business,
but I hated it. When I looked across the room to the bond trading
desk, I noticed that everyone was very quiet. They weren't shouting at
each other; they were very civil. That appealed to me. I got permis-
sion to switch to the bond trading desk.
At the time, Wood Gundy was trying to become a major dealer in
the U.S. bond market, and they had brought in a bunch of hired-gun
traders. These guys were just blowing up left, right, and center. There
were huge losses everywhere. One trader even hid his tickets to con-
ceal his losses. Eventually almost everyone was fired, though I was
still left, along with a few others.
Were you happier on the bond desk?
I had mixed feelings. I was certainly happy to get away from the ver-
bal abuse. Also, the bond desk was very exciting because it traded
huge position sizes compared with the equity desk. I liked the idea
that I could make or lose five times as much as twenty people com-
bined on the equity desk. But I didn't like being responsible for
trading all sorts of illiquid issues, most of which were overseas
bonds.
The Japanese would call me at 2 or 3 A.M., and I would have to
make bids or offers on huge sums of illiquid bonds without even
knowing where the market was. And because I was sleepy, it was pos-
sible to give them the wrong quote. If you gave them a quote that was
off by 100 basis points, they would hold you to it. You could have a $ 1
million loss on an obvious error, and they would still insist on the
trade being valid.
Did that ever happen to you?
Oh yes.
You had a $ 1 million error?
Well I didn't have a $1 million error, but I had a $300,000 error.
Just because you gave them the wrong quote.
I was sleepy. I thought the yield was 9.5 percent when it was really
10.5 percent.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Is it normal to be held on a trade on a quote that is obviously an
error.''
It certainly wouldn't be considered normal in North America, and I
doubt that it would be the case anymore in Japan.
How did you do on balance in your trading?
I did well and was promoted as the youngest vice president at Wood
Gundy.
On what basis were you making buy and sell decisions?
I didn't have any methodology. I almost got to the point where I
thought the market was random.
But you must have been doing something right if you were mak-
ing money. Was it just a matter of gut feel?
All the trading I do involves gut feel. But at that point in my life, I
think I was bailed out because there was a major bull market in
bonds, and my instincts were apparently good enough to keep me off
the short side for the most part. In my best year, I made about
$700,000 for the desk, which is really nothing, considering it has to
be split among so many different people.
One time, over drinks with my boss, I said, "We're not really trad-
ing these bonds; we're really investing, just like one of our accounts.
And if that is what we're doing, there are better things to invest in."
"Don't go off half-cocked," he said. "We just have to keep dodging
and weaving."
It was at that point, after three years, that I really started to burn
out. I went as long as I did because it was exciting having the respon-
sibility of trading that much money.
By that point, had you developed a passion for trading?
Yes, I knew it was something I loved to do. I liked the idea that it was
me against the markets. I just didn't care for the markets I was trad-
ing. One major source of frustration was that the bond issues we were
trading in New York were highly illiquid. I decided to transfer to the
main office of Wood Gundy in Toronto because there I could trade
Canadian government bond securities, which were far more liquid. At
first I was very happy to be in the main office, trading liquid bond
markets, with lots of activity. After six months, however, I realized
that I didn't want to work in Canada. It's a country club environment
B A C K F R O M T H E A
where success has more to do with politics than with your perform-
ance. I was also getting very sick of bonds and interest rates.
Why?
Because it is such a commodity. At our morning meeting a standard
question always was: "What is going to happen today?" All the partic-
ipants would give this spiel about why they thought the market was
going up or down. They would talk about the influence of currency
rate movements, fiscal and monetary policy, interest rate trends in the
United States and other countries, and so on. When my turn came, I
would simply say, "1 think the market is going down today." When
they asked me why, I would answer, "Because it went up yesterday."
They didn't know whether to take me seriously or not. I had reached
the point where I thought the market was so efficient that if the price
went up big one day, it was just as likely to go down the next day.
One morning I woke up and realized that I didn't want to worry
about interest rates again for the rest my life. I knew that I couldn't
stand to trade another bond. I walked into work and quit, even
though I had moved to Canada only seven months earlier. They
couldn't believe it.
You quit even though you didn't have another job?
Oh yeah, I just couldn't stand it anymore. The ironic thing is that my
wife called me the same day to tell me that she had quit her job, and
I hadn't even hinted to her that I was going to quit mine. I knew she
had been unhappy, but I didn't think she was on the verge of quitting.
It was amazing that we both quit our jobs independently on the same
day We decided to delay looking for new jobs so that we could take
six months to travel across the United States, going from ski resort to
ski resort.
When we were at Lake Tahoe, we took a side trip to San Fran-
cisco. We loved the city and decided to move there. When we
returned to Toronto after the end of our trip, we thought it would be a
good idea to revisit San Francisco before actually moving, just to
make sure that we still liked it as much as we had on our visit. While
we were there, we looked for jobs, and we were both offered posi-
tions. We even found a house we liked and put in a bid that was
accepted. We thought we were set. We flew back to Toronto, rented a


--- PAGE 13 ---
truck, and moved our stuff to San Francisco. But when we got there,
we found out that both jobs had fallen through.
What was the job you thought you had?
I had interviewed with a small venture capital firm. The person who
interviewed me had also graduated from McGill.
You must have thought that gave you the inside track.
Yes, he was very enthusiastic. "Oh sure, we can use you. Come
back out, and we will set you up." When I arrived in San Francisco,
I kept calling him, but didn't receive any return phone calls. When
I finally got through to him, he said, "Oh, we're not hiring M.B.A.s
this year." It was a complete reversal from what he had told me
before.
I had put my life savings into the down payment for the house, so
we hardly had any money left. Initially we weren't worried because we
thought we would get jobs in a month or two. Month after month
went by, however, and neither one of us got a job offer. I couldn't
believe it. I started drinking cheap beer and sleeping late.
Were you depressed?
No, I'm not that kind of person. It was just too stressful for me to get
up in the morning and pound the pavement. I couldn't believe that
after having a successful career in New York, I couldn't even get a hint
at a job offer. I was so desperate that I even went to insurance com-
panies to interview for sales jobs.
Sounds as if that is a job you would have hated.
Absolutely, but I was desperate. I would have taken anything. I
needed money to pay my mortgage, and I didn't want to ask my family
for help.
What was your wife's attitude during this ordeal?
She was pretty positive. She felt we would come up with something.
Did you run out of money?
We did. Then after we had been there tor six months, my wife got the
first job, a retail sales position at J. Crew, which was a large step down
for her after having been a merchandise manager for Liz Claiborne.
She also had reached the point where she was willing to take virtually
any job. We had just run out of money that month, and she used her
first paycheck to pay the mortgage.
Were you panicking before she got her job at the last minute?
I had given up hope. My attitude was that whatever happens, hap-
pens. Take the house. I don't care. I was very distraught. That's when
I first learned about San Francisco. They're not impressed if you're
from New York, L.A., or London. It's not a transient city like New
York or L.A., where it is okay to come from other cities and get a job.
San Francisco is more of a community. People want to see that you
have lived in the area for a while. Now I really appreciate that aspect
of the city, but at the time it was very frustrating.
Do you mean the jobs you were applying for would go to people
who were local?
Absolutely, although there wasn't a huge slew of jobs anyway. I
couldn't believe that I had gone from a status position to the verge
of working at Starbucks. I went to the library and microfiched every
financial-sounding company and sent them my resume. Eventually,
I got a call from someone who liked my resume. "I don't have a job
for you myself," he said, "but I have a friend who I think might be
interested."
What about your resume appealed to him?
He liked the variety—a combination of financial jobs and artistic
interests.
Before you got that job nibble, I imagine this must have been the
low point of your life.
No it wasn't. The low point is coming up. The person who had
received my resume convinced his friend who ran the sales and trad-
ing unit for Volpe, Welty & Co., a regional brokerage firm, to give me
a shot at an interview. When I arrived at the interview, I had no idea
what to expect. He asked me about my background, and I told him
what I've just told you.
He then asked me, "How much do you want to make?"
I added $200 to my mortgage and answered, "$2,500 a month."
"How about $4,000?," he asked.
"That would be good too." I answered.
Did he know your predicament?
No, but he saw the jobs I'd held previously, and I don't think he felt
right offering me as little as I was asking.


--- PAGE 14 ---
What job did he hire you for?
I was hired to be an institutional stockbroker, but I had no accounts. I
had to cold-call in front of other people, which really got to me. I had
gone from being Mister Bond Trader, whom everybody wanted to take
out to dinner, to cold-calling no-name institutions to buy our lousy
stock ideas.
When you were cold-calling, I guess a lot of people just hung up
on you.
Absolutely. I used to do waves of calls. I had a list of people to call,
and I just put my head down and started dialing. I don't have an
aggressive nature, so I tried drawing people in by just being a nice guy.
That didn't work too well. It was a relentless day-after-day process. It
was difficult watching other people doing business while I was mak-
ing these phone calls, knowing that it was obvious to them whenever
someone hung up on me. I would have a five-second conversation,
put the phone down, and look around. Then I would have to go on to
the next phone call. It was such a demeaning process. I hated it,
hated it. I didn't know when I would ever be able to cover my draw. I
couldn't generate a trade.
You don't mean that literally?
Yes I clo. I had zero trades.
How long did this go on?
I probably didn't have a single account or trade for eight months.
You cold-called for eight months without a single sale! That
sounds brutal. Was this your low point?
No, this wasn't the low point [he laughs]. The low point happened
shortly afterward. Regardless of my lack of success in selling, I knew
there was a big difference between trading and selling. Eventually,
after watching the markets, I decided I had to start trading again.
Although I didn't have any money, I realized that I could take out a
home-equity loan and do whatever I wanted with the money. I said to
myself, "I can liquefy my house and invest it."
I can see it coming . . .
I started selling stocks that I thought were up too high—powerhouse
stocks like Liz Claiborne and the Gap—and buying stocks that I
thought were down too low. In effect, I was shorting good companies
and buying bad companies.
How much of a home-equity loan did you take out?
I had placed a down payment of $75,000 on the house, and I took out
a loan of $50,000 against it. Within three weeks of taking out the
loan, I had lost 75 percent of the money.
How did your wife react to this turn of events?
She had no idea.
She didn't know that you took out a home-equity loan?
She knew about the loan, but she didn't know what I did with the
money.
What did you tell her you were going to do with the money?
I did tell her that I was going to invest it, but I told her that I was
going to invest it in a conservative dividend play that would give us a
greater return than the rate we had to pay on the home-equity loan.
That was my intention. But once I had the money I thought, "I'm not
going to put this into some boring dividend play to make a few dollars
on the spread between the dividend income and my loan rate."
When you are at a brokerage firm, there is always something excit-
ing going on. There is always some stock doubling or tripling. You
can't avoid the frenzy. I was listening to the stories being pitched all
around me. The salesmen could make any story sound great.
So apparently you had failed to learn your lesson about not listen-
ing to tips and rumors. You made the same mistake all over again.
Absolutely. I couldn't bring myself to tell my wife that I had lost
almost all the money. I had trouble sleeping the entire month. I made
up all these excuses why I was looking so sickly. I told my wife that I
had the flu. She was worried, but she had no idea what the truth was.
One day a buddy who worked beside me gave me a tip to buy
Commodore Computer. "I think this story is really going to work," he
said. "We're hearing that their latest game is going to be a high-flier." I
was so desperate that I told myself, "I'm going to do it." I took every-
thing that was left in my account, leveraged it at 200 percent, and
bought the stock.
That was the low point in my life. The $75,000 I had put into my


--- PAGE 15 ---
S11MHRT W A I T O N
house was my entire savings. The thought that because of some gam-
bling 1 could lose everything that I had built up in ten years of saving
really scared me. It was the black abyss.
The stock went from $10 to $17, and I got out. After I liquidated,
the stock reached as high as the low twenties, but it eventually went
back down to zero when the company went bankrupt. That single
trade was enough to almost make me whole again.
You actually were salvaged by pure luck, by a tip that could have
been a disaster because the stock eventually ended up going to
zero. You just happened to catch it during the right time window.
It was just luck. To this day, I look back at pivotal points in my life,
and I don't know whether they were due to luck or intelligence, but I
never care about the difference. It's funny how things work out. I
always tell people that luck is a very important factor in this business.
Maybe you have to put yourself in the position to be lucky, but I think
we all get our fair share of luck—both good and bad. We just have to
take it as it comes.
That Commodore trade saved me. You might think my attitude
would have been: "That tip worked, so I'm going to listen to other
tips." But at the time, I recognized the luck involved. I realized that I
was being bailed out by the stock market gods. I did learn my lesson.
From that point on, 1 traded so much better.
Did you say, "Thank God, I won't sin again"?
Exactly. Even though everything worked out, the stress was incredi-
ble. Therefore, when I made it back, it was a godsend. Then I just
started to chip away at it. Of course, I still had a lot to learn, but at
least I had that experience behind me. I think it's important to get
that low and see the abyss.
How did that help you?
The shock of the experience gave me clarity. I understood that
stocks don't go up and stay up because of stories, tips, or people's
opinions; they go up for specific reasons. I was determined to find
those reasons, shut out the world, and then act on my own knowl-
edge. I started to do that, and over time, my record got better and
better.
This was really the first time in your life that you were trading
stocks with any success. What types of things were working?
The theme I noticed back then that has persisted through bull and
bear markets is: Good companies, on balance, continue to go up.
Grandmothers in Kansas City know that.
And how do you find these good companies?
I look for companies that have been blessed by the market. They may
be blessed because of a long string of quarters they've made [quarters
in which the company's reported earnings reached or exceeded expec-
tations], or for some other reason. You can identify these stocks by
how they act. For some reason, the market goes to some stocks, and it
doesn't go to others, no matter how many brokers tell their clients to
buy these other stocks because they are cheap.
In effect, you actually reversed what you had been doing before:
Instead of buying bargains and selling stocks that had gone up a
lot, you were buying the expensive stocks.
That theme has continued to this day. The hardest thing to do is to
buy a high-flying stock or to sell a stock that has gone down a lot, but
I always find that the hardest thing to do is the right thing to do. It's a
difficult lesson to learn; I'm still learning it now.
What tells you—to use your word—that a stock is "blessed"?
It's a combination of things. The fundamentals of the stock are only
about 25 percent of it.
What is the remaining 75 percent?
Another 25 percent is technical.
What are you looking at on the technical side?
I like stocks that show relative linearity in their trend. I don't want
stocks that are swinging all over the place.
That's 50 percent, and you have already gone through fundamen-
tal and technical. What's left?
Another 25 percent is watching how a stock responds to different
information: macroeconomic events, its own news flow. I also pay
attention to how a stock reacts to going to round numbers: $20, $30,
etcetera. I try to get a feel whether a company has that special shine
to it.


--- PAGE 16 ---
S T U A R T WALTOfl
R A C K F R O M T
:
What kind of response are you looking for?
I want to see a stock move higher on good news, such as a favorable
earnings report or the announcement of a new product, and not give
much ground on negative news. If the stock responds poorly to nega-
tive news then it hasn't been blessed.
That's 75 percent. What's left?
The last 25 percent is my gut feeling for the direction of the market as
a whole, which is based on my sense of how the market is responding
to macroeconomic news and other events. It's almost like looking at
the entire market as if it were an individual stock.
How long do you typically hold a stock once you buy it?
I don't day trade, but I only hold a stock for an average of about a few
weeks. Also, when I buy a stock, even if it's a core position of a few
hundred thousand shares, I might be in and out of it twice in the same
day and six times in the same week, trying to get a feel about whether
I'm doing the right thing. If I'm not comfortable with the way the stock
is trading, I get out. That's one thing I love about running a hedge
fund. I don't have to worry about my customers seeing the schizophre-
nia in my trading. I used to work for a company where the customers
received a confirmation statement for every trade that I did. They
would go nuts. They would call up and say, "Are you crazy? What are
you doing? I thought you were supposed to be doing real research."
What prompts you to get out of a stock?
I get out either because the stock looks as though it's rolling over, and
I am in danger of losing what I have made, or because the stock has
made too much money in too short a period of time.
Would you then look to buy back the stock on a correction?
Yes.
Does that work, or do you often end up missing the rest of the
move?
I often end up missing the rest of the move because the stocks I am
buying are good companies, and they usually continue to go up.
Have you considered changing your trading approach so that you
hold stocks longer?
I have changed gradually over the years, but to this day, I still fall prey
to the mistake of getting out too early.
When you get out of a stock, do you sometimes buy it back at a
higher price?
Sure, all the time.
So you are at least able to bite the bullet and admit that you
made a mistake by getting out, and then get back in at a higher
price. You don't say, "I can't get buy it now; I sold it $10 lower."
I may have done that in earlier years, but now buying back a stock at
a higher price doesn't bother me at all. To me, the successful stock is
not one that I bought at 10 and held to a 100, but one where I picked
up 7 points here, 5 here, another 8 here, and caught a major part of
the move.
But it sounds as if it would be easier to just buy one of these
blessed stocks and hold it.
Sometimes, but it really depends on market conditions. For example,
right now valuations are so high that I don't have any core positions
that I intend to hold on to.
That brings me to a question I was going to ask: In this type of
market, where the leading stocks have already seen such extraor-
dinary price run-ups, do you still use the same approach? If not,
how do you adjust your methodology?
To be honest, I'm having a hard time adjusting. My philosophy is to
float like a jellyfish and let the market push me where it wants to go. I
don't draw a line in the sand and say this is my strategy and I'm going
to wait for the market to come to me. I try to figure out what strate-
gies are working in the market. One year it might be momentum,
another year it might be value.
So you adopt your strategy to match your perception of the mar-
ket environment.
Exactly, I try to anticipate what the market is going to pay for.
How do you know when there is a sea change?
I'll look at everything and listen to as many people as I can, from cab-
drivers to stock analysts. Then I sit back and try to see what idea rises
to the top. Sometimes the opportunities are so obvious that you
almost can't lose when they come around; the only problem is that
they don't corne around that often. The key is not to lose money in the
times in between.


--- PAGE 17 ---
STOUT W A L T D N
Give me an example of an opportunity that was that obvious.
Last year [1998] it was very clear to me—I don't like saying stuff like
this because it makes it sound as though I have a crystal ball—that
the market had a very good chance of rolling over in a serious way
during August.
What made you so sure?
I constantly evaluate market sentiment—Is the market hopeful? Is it
fearful?—and wait for the price action to confirm my assessment.
Throughout last winter and spring, the situation was very confound-
ing. There were lots of reports about potential problems in Asia, but
the market ignored everything. Therefore, the only way to make
money was to be long, even in the face of this potential trouble.
So I decided to get really long in July. The leaders were performing
great, and the market was roaring. At one point, I was up 15 percent
for the month. Then all of a sudden, in a matter of days, I lost every-
thing and actually found myself down 3 percent for the month. The
market took the money away so quickly that just by looking at my own
portfolio, which was filled with market leaders, not stocks with poor
fundamentals, I knew something had to be wrong.
What did you do at the time? You said you had started out the
month heavily long. Did you cover your entire position? Did you
go net short?
I was 130 percent long. What I typically do when I believe there's a
major bearish event occurring in the market is to sell everything and
then just watch. That's what I did then.
Did you go short?
Yes, about two weeks later. I thought that the Asian crisis that precip-
itated the break would have a second leg to it. Usually you don't just
hear about a problem and then have it end. We also started seeing
headlines about potential problems in Russia. Although we had seen
these types of news reports before, the difference this time around
was that prices were responding. I felt convinced that the situation
would continue. Russia was not going to get fixed the next day, nei-
ther would Thailand or Korea, and prices were reflecting these fears.
During the second week of August, I went 130 percent net short, and
the scenario played out. To me it was very obvious.
B A C K F R O M THE flifS'S
When did you cover your short position?
I covered my shorts during the second week of October. I have a
number of rules taped to my quote machine. One of these is: Buy on
extreme weakness and sell on extreme strength. The only way to iden-
tify extremes is to get a feel for the sentiment, whether it is euphoria
or pessimism. Then you have to act on it quickly, because there are
often abrupt peaks and bottoms. By the second week of October, I
felt that I had to take advantage of the opportunity of the market's
extreme weakness to cover all my shorts. I covered the entire position
in one day and actually went net long 25 percent.
Was there anything significant about that day in particular that
prompted you to reverse your position?
That day, stocks like Dell went down from 50 to 40, and before the
end of the day they were going up 2 or 3 points at a clip.
So you were buying these stocks at much higher prices than they
were trading at earlier the same morning.
Absolutely. Actually one of the things I like to see when I'm trying to
buy stocks is that they become very difficult to buy. I put an order in
to buy Dell at 42, and I got a fill back at 45. I love that.
Do you just put your buy orders in at the market, or do you try to
get filled at a particular price?
I always buy and sell at the market. I never mess around trying to get
the best fill. I'm a broker's dream.
You said you went long about 25 percent. When did you increase
that long position?
Whenever I start to go back in on the long side, I like to wait and see
that the market rebound continues the next day and that there is no
further bearish news. If there is additional bearish news and the mar-
ket doesn't go down, then 1 really go nuts.
Did that happen then?
It didn't happen the next day, but it happened later in the week.
There was more news about the collapse of Long Term Capital. [The
multibillion-dollar hedge fund was overleveraged in the bond market
and suffered enormous losses, leading to fears of repercussions to the
entire financial system. See David Shaw interview.] The market just
shrugged it off. That gave me greater confidence to just plow in on the


--- PAGE 18 ---
long side. I had a chance to buy all these market leaders while they
were down sharply from their peaks, which I love to do.
Did the all-or-nothing trade that recouped most of the money
you had lost from your home-equity loan mark the beginning of
your successful trading career? Did you stay true to your vow to
give up your trading transgressions?
For the most part. I immediately started trafficking in quality growth
names. I bought the stocks that went up more than the market when
the market was going up. I figured those were the horses to bet on. I
forced myself to buy these stocks on down days. I found these stocks
would often go up five points in a week, whereas I would have been
lucky to get five points in a year in the low-quality stocks I had previ-
ously been buying.
The only time I really got into trouble was when I fell prey to a
great sales pitch. The most dangerous thing on the Street is the abil-
ity to communicate. I worked with some great salesmen. They would
say, "Stuart, you have to look at this." And sometimes in a weak
moment, I would rationalize that I'd done well and had some extra
money to speculate with. Maybe this trade would work, and if it
didn't, I'd get out quickly. Before I knew it, I would be down 20 or 30
percent on the trade. It's a lesson that I continually have to learn.
Do you still find yourself vulnerable to listening to tips even now?
Absolutely. At some level, I have a gambling urge, which I decided a
long time ago I needed to satisfy, but in a small way. Therefore, I set
aside a small amount of money in the fund for doing these speculative
trades.
On balance, do you end up winning or losing on these trades?
About breakeven.
How did you go from being a stockbroker to a fund manager? For
that matter, did you ever make a sale?
Eventually I started to do okay as a stockbroker because I learned
how to sell.
How do you sell?
You need to find out what the customer wants and package your sales
pitch—not the product—accordingly.
What did the customer want?
Instant gratification, excitement, sizzle, the comfort of knowing that
lots of other people were buying the same stock, and a million reasons
why the stock would go up.
So you tried to make the stock sound as good as possible without
any qualifications?
Absolutely. That's what all stockbrokers do.
Weren't you troubled by making something uncertain sound
certain?
Sure, but it wasn't exactly lying, because I had no idea whether the
stock would go up or not. It was, however, a huge embellishment.
After a while, I just couldn't hack it anymore.
How did you get out of it?
After I started doing well in my own account, 1 began recommending
some of my own ideas, not just the stocks that were part of the com-
pany line. I was bailed out by one of my accounts who liked my style
and offered me a job to manage money for them. That was really what
I wanted to do. If I hadn't landed that job, I would have had to quit
because I was once again at the point of waking up in the morning
and feeling I can't do this anymore.
What kind of firm was it?
It was a registered investment advisory firm that managed about $300
million in institutional accounts, They had their own strategy on how
to invest.
Were you allowed to make your own trading decisions, or did you
have to follow their guidelines?
I could buy any stock I wanted, but it had to meet their investment
criteria.
What were those restrictions?
The price/earnings ratio had to be below 15. Earnings had to be grow-
ing by at least 20 percent per year. There were also some balance
sheet and liquidity conditions that had to be met.
Was that a help or a hindrance?
It was a huge impediment because it dramatically narrowed the uni-
verse of companies that I could invest in.


--- PAGE 19 ---
What stocks were you missing because of this policy?
For example, I couldn't buy a Microsoft or a Cisco; instead I had to
buy a Novell or a 3Com.
Because the price/earnings ratio was greater than fifteen?
Right.
Do you feel it is a flawed investment policy to try to buy stocks
that have low price/earnings ratios?
Not necessarily. I would never adopt that type of strategy myself, but
I feel that any sound strategy will work as long as you stick to it.
Were there any restrictions on the stocks you bought for your
own account?
I was allowed to buy any stocks I wanted to, as long as they were not
the same names I was buying for the company's clients.
What was the difference in performance between your own
account and the accounts you were managing for the com-
pany?
For the company accounts, I would only be up an average of 1 5 to 20
percent per year, while on my own account, I was averaging well over
100 percent per year.
Did you try going to management and saying, "Look, here's what
I've been doing for my own account without any restrictions. Let
me trade the company accounts the same way."
Sure, but they had geared the firm to follow their particular philoso-
phy, and that's what the customers bought into. The last thing an
investor wants to see is a change in strategy.
My idea, however, was to try to adapt to any new strategies that
seemed to be working. Eventually I built up enough capital in my own
account so that I could go my own way. I started a fund with $1.3 mil-
lion, about half of which was my own.
How did you get investors?
Strictly word of mouth. I didn't do any marketing.
I see that you're here completely on your own, which is amaz-
ing for a hedge fund managing $150 million. Don't you have
any help?
I have a secretary who comes in every other day.
B A C K F R O M T H E A B Y S S
That's it? Don't you need any additional assistance?
I hired someone last year—a great guy who is now off on his own—
but I knew immediately that it wasn't for me.
Why is that?
I found that having another opinion in the office was very destabiliz-
ing. My problem is that I am very impressionable. If I have someone
working for me every day, he may as well be running the money
because I'm no longer making my own decisions.
I like quiet. I talk all day on the phone, and that's enough for me. I
don't need committees, group meetings, and hand-holding to rational-
ize why a stock is going down. I even like the fact that my assistant
only comes in every other day, so that every alternate day I am com-
pletely on my own and can sit here and germinate.
I understand that completely, because I work in a home office. I
find that when you work on your own, you can get completely
engrossed in what you are doing.
Exactly. That's the main reason I like to be on my own. People come
in here and ask me, "How could you manage this much money on
your own? Don't you want to become a bigger firm?"
What do you tell them?
Well it's worked for me so far. The only thing that matters is how well
I do, not the amount of zeros I'm managing.
With your track record, you could easily raise a lot more money.
That would just kill everything. The only way I can possibly maintain
my track record is to make sure I don't overwhelm myself with
assets. Right now, if I have a good quarter, it ramps up the amount of
money I am managing. By growing through capital appreciation, I
can evolve my trading style to accommodate the increase in assets
managed.
I guess you would rather make 50 percent plus on a $150 million
than 20 percent on $ 1 billion.
Exactly. A lot of people who do well and decide to dramatically
increase their assets find that their first year is their best year. After
that, it's downhill. Of course, they still make huge sums of money.
But I want to feel good about coming in every day. I want to have


--- PAGE 20 ---
happy customers and see my assets steadily growing. I don't want to
be cranking out a great living on a business that is deteriorating. I
have almost no overhead, so I still make a great income. There is no
need to get greedy.
Do you think the experience of coming close to the edge of bank-
ruptcy helped you become successful?
Definitely.
In what way?
The odd thing about this industry is that no matter how successful
you become, if you let your ego get involved, then one bad phone call
can put you out of business. My having seen the abyss might spare
me from malting that phone call. I know how quickly things can go
bad. Any stock can go to zero, and you need to realize that.
When I talk to potential new investors I focus on my mistakes.
Because if you are going to invest with someone, you want that per-
son to have made mistakes on his own tab and not to make them on
yours. Someone who has never made a mistake is dangerous, because
mistakes will happen. If you've made mistakes, you realize they can
recur, and it makes you more careful.
We've talked about the mistakes you've made early in your
career. What mistakes have you made during your more recent
successful years?
This year I got very bearish without waiting for prices to confirm my
opinion.
What made you so blindly bearish?
I became very concerned about the rise in interest rates. In the past,
higher interest rates had always led to lower stock prices, and I
assumed the same pattern would repeat this year. The market, how-
ever, chose to look at other factors. 1 didn't wait for the market to con-
firm the fear of higher interest rates, and I lost money very quickly. I
was down 7 percent in March, which is a pretty big one-month drop
for me.
Any other mistakes come to mind?
In January 19981 invested in a bunch of small-cap initial public offer-
ings (IPOs), which all performed incredibly poorly in the first quarter
they went public.
What was your mistake there?
My mistake was getting involved in illiquid securities without doing
sufficient research.
What prompted you to buy these stocks?
Market sentiment. The market was getting very excited about con-
ceptual IPOs—stocks with a dream and a story but no earnings.
When stocks like these go sour, they can go down 70 percent or more
very quicldy. It was as if a tornado had swept through my portfolio. I
was down 12 percent for the month and decided to liquidate every-
thing. One stock that I bought at 18, I sold at 2.
If these stocks were down that much, wouldn't you have been
better off holding them in case they bounced back? What hap-
pened to these stocks after you liquidated them?
They bounced, but not by much. As I liquidated these stocks, I used
the money to buy the types of stocks that I should've been buying—
good companies at much higher prices.
So you had deviated from your philosophy.
Yes, once again. It's like a junkie who is off drugs for three years and
then runs into some crack dealer who is able to convince him to start
again. I don't mean to blame other people for convincing me. It was my
own fault for allowing myself to be susceptible to these stories. I think
I've learned not to trade on those types of stories anymore. The good
news is that I quickly switched back to buying the types of companies
that I like. By the end of the quarter, I had recovered all my losses.
I guess the implication is that holding on to a losing stock can be
a mistake, even if it bounces back, if the money could have been
utilized more effectively elsewhere.
Absolutely. By cleaning out my portfolio and reinvesting in solid
stocks, I made back much more money than I would have if I had
kept the other stocks and waited for a dead cat bounce.
Do you talk to companies at all?
I used to visit companies all the time when I was working for the
investment advisory firm.
Did it help at all?
Hardly at all. I found that either they told me what they had previ-
ously told everyone else, and it was already factored into the price, or


--- PAGE 21 ---
else they lied to me. Once in a blue moon you would learn something
valuable, but there was a huge opportunity cost traveling from com-
pany to company to get that one piece of useful information.
Can you give me an example of a situation where management
lied to you.
The examples are almost too numerous to remember.
Pick out one that stands out as being particularly egregious.
I saw Autumn Software* make a presentation at a conference. I had
never heard such a great story. They produced software that was used
in computer backup systems all around the world. The management
team was very believable and articulate. The stock was high, but I felt
it was a big momentum horse. I bought half a million shares, and the
stock started to crumble almost immediately.
I called management and asked them what was happening. "We
have no idea," they said. "Business is actually better than last month."
One day I was out at Nantucket, and I received a phone call inform-
ing me that Autumn had just preannounced that they would have a
disappointing quarter. The stock, which had closed at 30 that day,
opened at 7 the next morning. It was funny because every time I had
talked to the company, "business had never been better." That proved
to me that as an outside investor you never know the truth.
Is this an example of a situation in which you ignored your own
rule of paying careful attention to how a stock responds to news,
or if it goes down for no apparent reason?
Unfortunately for my former employer, I was still learning that lesson
at the time.
Did that experience sour you completely on talking to management?
Not completely. I might call a company's management when its stock
is very low and no one is talking to them, because that is when they
are usually desperate enough to talk to anyone. My hope is that I
might learn about some catalyst that could cause the stock to turn
around.
What are the traits of a successful trader?
I think a lot of successful traders are unemotional, hardworking, and
^Pseudonym
disciplined. Ironically, I find myself lacking on each of those counts. I
get very emotional; I really don't work that hard; and I'm not as disci-
D 
•'
plined as I should be. I would attribute my own success to having
both conviction about my gut feelings and the ability to act on them
quickly. That is so critical.
So in your own case, you've been able to offset some other draw-
backs simply by having the ability to pull the trigger?
Exactly, that's a very good point.
What is the biggest misconception people have about the stock
market?
Currently, the biggest misconception is the widespread belief that it
is easy to make a living trading in the stock market. People feel they
can give up their jobs and trade for a living; most of them are bound
to be disappointed.
What are the trading rules you have posted on your computer?
> Be patient—wait for the opportunity.
>» Trade on your own ideas and style.
*> Never trade impulsively, especially on other people's advice.
*• Don't risk too much on one event or company.
> Stay focused, especially when the markets are moving.
*• Anticipate, don't react.
>• Listen to the market, not outside opinions.
*• Think trades through, including profit/loss exit points, before you
put them on.
> If you are unsure about a position, just get out.
»» Force yourself to trade against the consensus.
*• Trade pattern recognition.
> Look past tomorrow; develop a six-month and one-year outlook.
> Prices move before fundamentals.
*• It is a warning flag if the market is not responding to data correctly.
* Be totally flexible; be able to admit when you are wrong.
*• You will be wrong often; recognize winners and losers fast.
^ Start each day from last night's close, not your original cost.
> Adding to losers is easy but usually wrong.
>• Force yourself to buy on extreme weakness and sell on extreme
strength.


--- PAGE 22 ---
STUTRT W A L T O N
*• Get rid of all distractions.
^ Remain confident — the opportunities never stop.
I know you have no desire to be working with anyone, but let's
say five years from now you decided to pursue a new career mak-
ing films. Could you train someone to take over for you and
invest in accordance with your guidelines?
I could teach someone the basic rules, but I couldn't teach another
person how to replicate what I do, because so much of that is
based on experience and gut feeling, which is different for each per-
son.
After you reach a certain level of financial success, what is the
motivation to keep on going?
The challenge of performance and the tremendous satisfaction I get
from knowing that 1 contributed to people's financial security. It's fan-
tastic. I have a lot of clients, some of whom are my own age, who I
have been able to lead to total financial independence.
How do you handle a losing streak?
I trade smaller. By doing that, I know I'm not going to make a lot, but
I also know I'm not going to lose a lot. It's like a pit stop. I need to
refresh myself. Then when the next big opportunity comes around —
and it always does — if I catch it right, it won't make any difference if
I've missed some trades in the interim.
What advice do you have for novices?
Either go at it full force or don't go at it at all. Don't dabble.
Is there anything pertinent that we haven't talked about?
It is very important to me to treat people with fairness and civility.
Maybe it's a reaction to all the abuse I took in the New York trading
rooms. But, whatever the reason, the everyday effort to treat others
with decency has come back to me in many positive ways.
Stuart Walton had no burning desire to be a trader, no special
analytical or mathematical skills, and was prone to emotional trad-
ing decisions that caused him to lose all or nearly all his money on
several occasions. Why, then, did he succeed, let alone succeed so
spectacularly?
There are five key elements:
Persistence. He did not let multiple failures stop him.
Self-awareness. He realized his weakness, which was listening to
other people's opinions, and took steps to counteract this personal
flaw. To this end, he decided to work entirely alone and to set aside a
small amount of capital—too small to do any damage—to vent his
tip-following, gambling urges.
Methodology. Walton became successful exactly when he devel-
oped a specific market philosophy and methodology.
Flexibility. Although Walton started out by selling powerhouse
stocks and buying bargains, he was flexible enough to completely
reverse his initial strategy based on his empirical observations of
what actually worked in the market. If he believes a stock he previ-
ously owned is going higher, he is able to buy it back at a higher price
without hesitation. If he realizes he has made a mistake, he has no
reservation about liquidating a stock, even if it has already fallen far
below his purchase price. Finally, he adjusts his strategy to fit his
perception of the prevailing market environment. In Walton's words,
"One year it might be momentum, another year it might be value."
Diagnostic capability. Most great traders have some special skill
or ability. Walton's talent lies in not only observing the same news
and information as everyone else, but also in having a clearer insight
into the broad market's probable direction—sometimes to the point
where the market's future trend appears obvious to him. This market
diagnostic capability is probably innate rather than learned. As an
analogy, two equally intelligent people can go to the same medical
school, work equally hard, and intern in the same hospital, yet one
will have much greater diagnostic skill because ability also depends
on intrinsic talent.
Walton's case history demonstrates that early failure does not pre-
clude later success. It also exemplifies the critical importance of
developing your own methodology and shutting out all other opinions.


--- PAGE 23 ---
MICHAEL LAUER
The Wisdom of Value,
the Folly of Fad
Just to set the record Straight, Michael Lauer was reluctant to do this inter-
view. Nothing personal, you understand. In fact, he admits being a fan of
the earlier Market Wizard books. It's just that he doesn't think he quali-
fies as a "market wizard"—at least not yet. "Perhaps after I've done this
for ten years, maybe then I'll qualify," he says.
Well, Lauer hasn't been managing a fund for ten years, but in the
seven plus years that he has, very few can match his combination of stel-
lar returns and low risk. Since inception in January 1993, Lauer's flagship
fund has realized a 72 percent average annual compounded return net
after deducting all fees (an estimated 97 percent gross return*, trouncing
the corresponding 13 percent return for the Russell 2000 (the stock
index that most closely matches Lauer's investment universe) and the 20
percent return for the S&P 500. A $1.0 million investment in Lauer's
fund at inception would have grown to an astounding $51.7 million in
just over seven years (net to investors after deducting fees), compared
with corresponding figures of $2.4 and $3.7 million for investments in
the Russell and S&P 500 indexes.
You might think that with such lofty returns, Lauer must be taking
some huge risks. Amazingly, Lauer has achieved his stratospheric returns
while keeping losses both small and short-lived. The maximum peak-to-
valley equity decline in Lauer's flagship fund was a moderate 8.7 per-
cent, and it has never taken more than four months for the fund to reach
a new high.
*Gross return figures were not available. This number represents the author's estimate,
based on reported net returns and stated fees.
T H E WISDOM OF V A L U E , THE F O L L Y OF FAD
Another notable feature of Lauer's performance is that even though
over 90 percent of his returns were earned on the long side, he has man-
aged to do remarkably well during declining market periods. Since the
inception of his Lancer Offshore fund nearly five years ago*, the S&P
500 has registered sixteen monthly declines for an aggregate loss of 60
percent. During those same losing months, Lauer's fund earned a cumu-
lative positive return of 66 percent.
Although Lauer emphasized what he considers the relative brevity of
his track record, his trading experience (a personal account) predates his
fund manager career by over a decade. He acknowledged that the aver-
age return for his personal account was even higher than for his funds,
but he downplayed this track record as irrelevant, because it was
achieved using leverage and involved a much lower asset base.
Lauer's flagship fund currently manages over $700 million. The capi-
tal under management could be significantly greater, but he is closed to
new investors and even returns assets when profits cause the funds he
manages to grow beyond what he considers an optimal size. Since Lauer
deliberately restricts himself to a small number of major stock invest-
ments at any given time (for reasons detailed in the interview), he could
increase the amount of money he manages by simply expanding the small
number of his holdings. Lauer, however, explains that he is very happy
with the status quo. His operation currently consists of only two traders,
two analysts, and several support staff—and he likes this cozy arrange-
ment. He has no desire to increase the size of the firm.
As a college student, Lauer supported himself by driving a cab during
the night shift, an experience he considers far more relevant to his later
success than his formal education. He graduated in 1979 with a B.A.
degree in international relations (he later earned an M.B.A. in finance).
Being fluent in several arcane languages, Lauer briefly went to work for
one of the government intelligence services, an experience he declined to
discuss for confidentiality reasons.
In 1980 an influential family friend, whose judgment he respected,
advised Lauer that he could find a more attractive career path in the
Lauer's performance numbers prior to the start of this fund are available only on a quar-
terly basis, making monthly comparisons with the S&P 500 index prior to this point
impossible.
30


--- PAGE 24 ---
financial sector. He arranged for Lauer to be interviewed by Oppen-
heimer & Co. Lauer landed a job in the stock research department,
where he eventually became a multi-industry and technology analyst.
During his career as a stock analyst, which spanned three brokerage
firms (his subsequent affiliations included Cyrus J. Lawrence and Kid-
der, Peabody), Lauer was selected to be a member of the Institutional
Investor All-Star analyst team for seven consecutive years—a streak that
ended when he decided to become a portfolio manager in 1993.
The interview was conducted in a conservatively decorated, window-
less conference room at Lauer's firm. Lauer's passion for investing and
confidence in the superiority of his own approach came across very
strongly. "I am sure I could explain to you every holding we have, and you
would agree that it makes absolute sense as a compelling investment."
He was also surprisingly opinionated about what he considered the folly
of some of his peers.
Our conversation began with the reason why Lauer does not include
as part of his track record the documented recommendations he made as
an analyst, which date back to 1982 (eleven years prior to the initiation
of his fund).
Note: Although the performance statistics in this introduction were
updated through March 2000, the interview itself (the first one I did for
this book), which contains a number of prognostications regarding spe-
cific stocks and funds, was conducted on May 4, 1999.
I guess your recommendations as an analyst cannot really be
turned into a meaningful track record unless you assume that
you would have traded the same percent of equity on each rec-
ommendation. But, of course, in real life, it doesn't work that
way. I'm sure you take much larger positions in some trades than
in others.
Absolutely. In fact, many analysts blow out when they become fund
managers because they do not have the conviction level that is essen-
tial to put on a big position. I tell my guys that if we come up with a
good idea, and as a firm we only buy 50,000 or 100,000 shares instead
of a million plus, then that trade is a mistake. This is also the reason
why we limit ourselves to a maximum of fifteen major positions (on
the long side).
I take it then that you disagree with the premise that more diver-
sification is better.
For a number of reasons. Concentration is critical to superior per-
formance. The greater the number of stocks you hold, the more mar-
ketlike your performance becomes, and the less value you add as a
money manager. Those who preach diversification as a risk control
measure are essentially hedging their fundamental ignorance of their
own holdings.
Also, one of my objectives is to be able to make money in any mar-
ket climate, which means that I have to decouple my performance
from the market indexes. Limiting myself to a relatively small number
of positions is essential to achieving this goal.
Finally, from a purely practical perspective, it is much easier to
find and stay on top of fifteen positions. I believe that few, if any, fund
managers are as well informed about our fifteen stocks as we are.
Why fifteen as opposed to five or fifty?
There has been some convincing academic research showing that
with fifteen different stocks one can achieve approximately 80 per-
cent of the benefits of much broader diversification. Keep in mind,
though, that to achieve our twin goals of exceptional performance
and low correlation with the broader market, we don't want to diver-
sify too much.
Is this a fixed number?
At any given time, our holdings will exceed fifteen stocks because of
the frequent rotation of our portfolio—the divesting of some of our
positions and the addition of others. But fifteen positions will usually
account for more than 75 percent of the portfolio's value.
What is your correlation with the major indexes?
It's been inconsequential. The closest correlation to an index would
be with the Russell 2000, and only because most of my long positions
happen to be the Russell 2000-type names.


--- PAGE 25 ---
In your recent letters to clients you've been surprisingly critical
of some mutual fund managers.
What is happening now [May 1999] in the fund industry is not only
dangerous but it's also downright insidious. Many of the largest pub-
lic funds that individual investors believe are being actively managed,
with stocks presumably being selected based on fundamental merits,
are actually closet index funds.
What do you mean?
Take Fidelity Magellan as an example. When Peter Lynch managed
the fund, he typically held one thousand to two thousand stocks. He
picked stocks based on value and earnings expectations, and his per-
formance was exemplary. During his thirteen-year stewardship, the
fund averaged a 29 percent return, nearly doubling the S&P 500
gains of 16 percent. Now the fund holds only about three hundred
stocks, with most of the money concentrated in about twenty-five
core positions, even though assets have mushroomed from $12 billion
to $90 billion since Peter Lynch's departure.
The fact that their portfolio is composed almost entirely of the
highest capitalization S&P 500 stocks and a few other high capitaliza-
tion stocks tells you that they are not picking stocks based on funda-
mental research. Magellan is only masquerading as an actively
managed fund, when in reality it has become nothing more than an
"enhanced index fund"—that is, an S&P 500 index fund that is
weighted to the top-tier stocks. The same can be said of many of
Magellan's peers. You could call this now prevalent investment style
"turbo-indexing."
If the strategy is working in terms of return, what is wrong with
that?
The problem is that their approach depends on the "greater fool"
premise. [It's okay to buy a stock that is grossly overpriced, as long as
you sell it to someone else—a greater fool—even higher.] This
process always ends in tragedy for those left holding the bag, which in
this case will likely be mutual fund investors.
The theoretical case for indexing is actually quite persuasive. It
allows the investor to own a representative piece of the market, with
presumably lower risk due to the index's diversification. In addition,
THE WISDOM OF VA1UE, THE F O L L Y OF FAD
because of their low turnover of stock holdings, index funds also offer
the benefits of lower management fees and more favorable tax treat-
ment. Frankly, there is nothing wrong with this argument. Indexation,
as it was intended, is a reasonable investment strategy.
As index funds outperformed the majority of other funds at lower
costs, however, they attracted a steadily expanding portion of invest-
ment flows. This shift, in turn, created more buying for the stocks in
the index at the expense of much of the rest of the market, which
helped the index funds outperform the vast majority of individual
stocks, and so on. As a result, what started out as a strategy for
investors to link their fortunes to the market via an index has been
turned on its head, with the index responding to the ever-increasing
share of index-linked investment capital.
How do funds such as Fidelity Magellan fit into this picture?
The managers of these funds are not being evaluated based on their
absolute performance, but rather on how their performance compares
with the benchmark—the S&P 500. Thus, their goal has become to
beat the benchmark and is not necessarily linked to their clients' para-
mount objective: making money.
As a consequence, to advance and preserve their careers, the pro-
fessional managers have shaped their portfolios to essentially overlap
the S&P 500 index. To the extent that they slightly modify the portfolio,
there has been a strong bias toward a greater concentration in the high-
est capitalization stocks. This has caused the highest tier of the S&P
500 stocks to become even more extremely overpriced relative to the
rest of the index. Thus, we now have a phenomenon of the top fifty
stocks in the S&P 500 trading at an average of over fifty times esti-
mated earnings, compared with an average of only about twenty for the
remaining 450 stocks in the index, and the high teens for a broader-
based index, such as the Russell 2000. The bottom line is that in the
present perverse incentive structure of benchmark-guided portfolios,
there is more risk for fund managers in not owning certain grossly over-
valued mega-capitalization stocks than in abstaining from them.
Including enhanced index funds, such as Fidelity Magellan, the
S&P 500 index funds now account for over two-thirds of new equity
investments. What happens when the enhanced index funds want to


--- PAGE 26 ---
M I C H A E L L A U E R
lighten or liquidate their current positions, which are overwhelmingly
concentrated in severely overpriced stocks? Who are they going to sell
to? This is an amazingly small community. Only about 25 mutual fund
institutions control almost one-third of total equity assets in this coun-
try, and every one of those guys knows what the others are doing. It
may become quite uncivil if they all run for the exits at the same time.
So you're saying that many individual investors who believe they
have placed their money into the most conservative stock funds
are unwittingly holding high-risk investments.
Absolutely. What started out as a conservative, passive investment
strategy has metamorphosed into a "greater fool" investment pyramid.
When this situation begins to unravel, the losses will be horrific. Peo-
ple talk in terms of a bear market being a 20 percent or 30 percent
decline. I can make a case why a stock such as Microsoft—which is
by far the largest component of the S&P 500, and not surprisingly the
biggest holding in Magellan (and most other mutual funds)—could
decline by as much as 80 or 90 percent. I believe that the risk is
potentially quite dreadful, not only to Microsoft, but also to the
indexes that it dominates, and by extension to the unsuspecting indi-
vidual investors in index-related funds.
That's an intriguingly provocative assertion. Please elaborate.
Microsoft is arguably one of the great success stories of the century
and a terrific company. However, at a market capitalization in excess
of $600 billion, it is valued at over twenty times its annual revenues—
that's revenues, not earnings. To put it in a different perspective, the
market is valuing Microsoft higher than the total GDP for Canada, a
G7 member. And this for a company whose growth rates have been
diminishing and whose primary product line—computer operating
systems—is threatened with obsolescence by alternative solutions. In
addition to the Justice Department, nearly the entire technology
industry is trying to undermine Microsoft—a process that has already
begun to happen.
You cite Microsoft's ratio of capitalization to revenue being very
high at twenty. What would be a normal ratio?
It depends on the industry, but for the stocks in our current portfolio,
market capitalization is typically smaller than revenues. For example,
J-HE W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF F A D
one recent holding, Tektronix, had revenues of about $2 billion and a
market capitalization of only $500 million at our cost basis. So in this
case, capitalization was a fraction of the revenues. That's what value
focus is about.
It sounds as if in the case of Microsoft you believe not only that
profits will fail to grow remotely enough to justify the current
valuation, but also that profits may actually be squeezed.
It is interesting that the operating system prices have not yet
declined, but the average selling price of a computer has declined by
over 20 percent in just the last year. All the PC manufacturers are tak-
ing the hit, and even Intel is having trouble selling its Pentium 3 chip.
Meanwhile, Microsoft is still charging the same prices they were two
or three years ago. Many of the PC manufacturers are clearly
unhappy that they were left absorbing all the compression in profit
margins. This situation can't last, and I submit to you, most future
compromises will come from Microsoft.
Nor will the forthcoming likely humbling of Microsoft be particu-
larly unique from a historical perspective. We have seen market dom-
inant companies come and go. Think of all the computer companies
of the 1980s that are no longer with us or have become inconsequen-
tial players: Burroughs, Sperry Wang, DEC, Data General, Prime
Computer, etcetera. This is a list of companies that thrived for a while
but eventually succumbed to competitive dynamics. When I joined
the business, DEC was the sexiest growth company and IBM was the
reigning technology king. The former was taken out of its misery by
Compaq (which then proceeded to stumble), while the latter is still
trying to redefine itself after several restructuring attempts. In either
case, the investors who stayed with these stocks did rather badly, par-
ticularly relative to the market.
I remember when I was working as a junior analyst, Prime Com-
puter had gone from $4 to $40 when the senior analyst recommended
it. That was a terrific lesson for someone who was just beginning. An
institutional salesman asked my "mentor": "With the stock having
gone from $4 to $40, what do you see that the rest of the world
doesn't? Obviously some of the good fortunes that you're talking
about are already reflected in the valuation." His rejoinder was that he


--- PAGE 27 ---
M 
CUM! 
I A U E R
now had a "higher conviction level." It seemed to me that his convic-
tion was grounded in the fact that just about every other major bro-
kerage firm was recommending the stock—a circumstance that
implied he would receive credit if the stock surged, while having the
comfort of lots of company if it plunged. A couple of years later, the
company was essentially out of business. That's what happens in
industries where the technology is so dynamic that it blinds people to
the competitive realities.
What lesson did that experience teach you?
That market perception, not the prevailing fundamentals, determines
a company's valuation. It was the market's perception that drove the
stock from $4 to $40, not the fundamentals. The fundamentals can
be very ephemeral, especially in the technology industry, as I believe
will prove to be the case with Microsoft and, for that matter, much of
the Internet phenomenon. The irony is that, with few exceptions, the
same factors that make an industry exciting also make it a potentially
ruinous investment because it will attract excess financial and intel-
lectual capital.
In other words, the more profitable a business, the more compe-
tition it will attract, driving down profit margins.
Exactly. That's why Microsoft has been so resolute about keeping
competitors at bay.
I take it by your comments that you believe the government's
antitrust suit against Microsoft has merit.
Yes, but the case itself will become a moot point because com-
petition from evolving alternative technologies will make their key
product—the operating system—obsolete, or certainly much less
ubiquitous.
Okay, you've made a convincing argument for why Microsoft
stock is on the precipice just waiting for someone to push it off
the cliff. Are you short?
Not now, although we have been from time to time. Keep in mind
that since Microsoft is an institutionally overowned, highly liquid
mega-cap stock—as is typical of most of our shorts—we can put on a
significant short position within an hour or less. Magellan and its
„. 
peers will take considerably longer to unload it, but with highly bruis-
T H E W I S D O M OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF FAD
ing consequences. Will I be short at the top? Of course not, but I
don't have to be. If the stock goes down 80 percent, as I believe is
possible, there will be plenty of room left on the downside.
But what I am getting at is: What will get you from the concept
into the actual position?
An event that triggers changes in how the company is perceived by
the investment community to something less stellar than it is now.
Another thing we monitor very closely is institutional ownership.
Microsoft has a 95 percent institutional ownership. Who is going to
absorb all of that supply if Fidelity and other benchmarking copycats
decide to reduce their holdings? When the institutional ownership
begins to dwindle, it is a safe bet that the stock will go down under
the weight of its own supply.
Are the statistics on fund holdings readily available?
Yes, the SEC requires them to report it. [He buzzes an assistant to
bring a sample sheet showing the fund holdings for Dell.]
What are you looking for in these numbers?
I'm looking for someone with a huge share position that is beginning
to sell. We may trade around a position. The big mutual funds don't
do that. They either buy, sell, or hold. If Magellan is beginning to sell
a 100-million-share position, what is going to happen to the stock—
particularly since many other funds will suddenly become like-
minded, exacerbating the supply?
You just asked for the numbers on Dell. I assume that is another
company whose stock you consider overvalued.
That is an understatement. Dell recently was selling for a market cap-
italization greater than the entire sales of the PC market. Now it's
down 30 percent from that point, and I submit it will go even lower,
because PCs are the quintessential commodity, with supply being
unlimited and demand finite.
What drove the stock so high?
The indexation phenomenon we spoke about and the generally self-
reinforcing feedback cycle, wherein people buy a stock precisely
because it is going up. If you look at the stock, it's a crowded trade.
Everyone owns it. For example, in the Janus 20 fund, which as its
name implies holds only 20 stocks, Dell accounts for almost 10 per-


--- PAGE 28 ---
'MICHAEL L A U E 8
cent of the total portfolio. Certainly Dell is a wonderful company. But
what we short are unreasonable Wall Street expectations, not inferior
quality companies.
I challenge you to defend the valuations of those companies that
account for the largest holdings in the most prominent mutual funds
in this country. You may tell me "they are great companies." That is
one of the biggest misconceptions in this business. With all due
respect to Warren Buffet, this business is not about investing in great
companies; it's about profiting from inefficiently priced stocks.
[At this point, an assistant brings in the fund holding statistics for
Dell. The numbers show that the large mutual funds have been reducing
their substantial positions.] You see, everybody here is basically selling.
It's no coincidence that the stock is down 30 percent from its high. I
submit to you that within six months Dell Computer will cease being
among the top ten holdings for most of the largest mutual funds.
Here we have an example of a stock whose price your analysis
showed was grossly overvalued, and there was evidence that
the large mutual funds were beginning to divest. Did you go
short?
If you go short a stock when there is no news to activate a decline,
then it could go against you for some time. Therefore, one has to time
the short in line with some event, such as the quarterly earnings
report. During the past several quarters, we felt that we wouldn't be
hurt going short Dell into a quarterly earnings report because the
stock has shown that it needs a spectacular positive surprise to go up.
If it just meets expectations, it goes down. If you get a situation where
the numbers are slightly disappointing, the stock plummets. That's
the type of situation we look for.
In a situation like that, do you time the short sale right before
the release of the earnings report?
That's a bit tricky because if the numbers are really disappointing,
there could be a preannouncement, which means you could miss the
opportunity if you wait too long. On the other hand, if you sell it too
far in advance of the report, you run the risk of the stock going sharply
against you before the report is released. In this case, we went short a
week or two before the report. The earnings were actually okay, but
T H E WISDOM OF V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y OF FAD
revenues were slightly below estimates, and the stock fell 30 percent
in three days.
When did you cover?
We got out immediately when the stock opened sharply lower after
the report.
How do you gauge when a stock is likely to have poor earnings?
This is an area where good contacts are invaluable. The only situation
in which we use brokerage firms' input frequently is on the short side.
If you get an analyst whose opinion you value saying, "It's a great com-
pany, but the earnings this quarter may be a bit light," you know that
the stock will probably be very vulnerable. You have to read between
the lines because, for political reasons, analysts are unlikely to actu-
ally change their ratings.
Assume you are short and the stock is going up against you, but
the fundamental reasons why you believe the stock is overpriced
have not changed. At what point do you throw in the towel?
It's the price of the stock that makes the trade right, not my visions of
what it should be. If the company comes in with results that are in
line with my expectations and that I consider to be disappointing vis-
a-vis the Street's forecast, but the market does not respond as I had
anticipated, I cover.
Give me an example.
Last year, I went short Intel a couple of weeks before the earnings
report because I thought the market expectations were unrealistically
optimistic. Not surprisingly, the company issued a preannouncement
that earnings would be close to 90 cents per share, which was way
below market expectations of about $1.15, and the stock fell sharply.
About a week later, they issued the official earnings figure, which was
92 cents, and the stock rallied sharply, more than recovering its entire
loss because the figure was considered "better-than-expected." Now, I
may think that's ridiculous, but if the news I expected is out, and the
market still does not respond as I had anticipated, I am not going to
fight it.
What is the selection process for the stocks you buy?
The basic theme that underlies three-quarters of our trades is buying
a dollar's worth of assets at a substantial discount. For purposes of


--- PAGE 29 ---
MICHM L A U E R ;
simplification, I would abbreviate our strategy on the long side by
emphasizing six elements of our selection screening process.
First, we must be knowledgeable about the industry and have
ready access to senior management—ideally in relationships that have
been developed and cultivated. This familiarity gives me a sense of
comfort about my assessment of what a stock's true value should be.
The second thing we look for is a market-adjusted decline of at
least 50 percent. I say market-adjusted because if the market is down
50 percent, then the stock being down 50 percent doesn't mean any-
thing. If the market is down 10 percent, 1 want to see the stock down
60 percent.
I find that interesting, because I know that statistical studies
show that buying stocks that demonstrate relative strength—that
is, that are stronger than the market average—tend to do better
than the general market. Yet you are only buying stocks that are
relatively weak.
Relative weakness is a gradual Chinese torture-type of decline. I'm
not talking about relative weakness; I'm talking about a catastrophic
plunge. To use the example of one of our recent holdings, Tektronix,
when a stock goes from nearly $50 to $15 at the same time the mar-
ket has been moving sharply higher, you have a debacle, not relative
weakness.
So you're looking for a collapse, not a stock that has done just
poorly over time.
I wait for the market to create a pricing inefficiency. That's what War-
ren Buffet talks about—Mr. Market giving him the opportunity. Well
we actually practice that, whereas most others just seem to preach it.
What gives you the opportunity is a few of the major funds deciding
that owning the stock is so stigmatizing that they don't want to be
associated with it. They would prefer to blow out of their position at
almost any price rather than have to answer for having the stock in
their portfolio at the end of the month.
But don't many of the stocks that crater just stay depressed or
drift even lower?
This is just the starting point of our screening process. We will get on
to the rest of my screen in a minute. Right now, I'm only focusing on
T H E WISDOM OF 
THE FOLLY OF FAD
the question of how I make sure I don't lose money. I'm not talking
about making money yet.
Then if a stock is doing okay, you're not even going to be looking
at it.
For our bread-and-butter—type of holding, which accounts for 75 per-
cent of our portfolio, it's not even going to show up on the screen.
The third element in the selection process is the balance sheet. I
will compromise on disappointing reported earnings—that's usually
why the stock got blasted in the first place—but I won't compromise
on the balance sheet. The debt has to be manageable relative to the
cash flow. Also, in my industries of interest, book value matters. Ide-
ally, I like to buy a stock at near, or even under book value. One of the
sad things about the current stock market environment is that it is so
driven by earnings expectations that balance sheets are practically
ignored.
Fourth, I want to see either company share repurchases or insider
buying. When the senior executives are buying shares for themselves,
and particularly when the company is repurchasing its stock for the
treasury, it sends a strong message that the downside is often limited
and provides an added safety net. What safety net does one have buy-
ing AOL? The stock could go down 90 percent and still be only fairly
priced.
That's a pretty radical prognostication. Before you go on with
your list of stock selection factors, can you explain why you con-
sider AOL so extremely overpriced?
AOL, which by the way is the third largest holding of Fidelity Magel-
lan, is the blue chip of the Internet world. The bulls argue that the
company is growing very quickly in a sector that is the industry of the
future, and therefore valuation is practically inconsequential. Well, as
a value investor partial to reason, I take issue with that viewpoint. In
the long run, there has to be some economic rationale for the price of
a stock. The barriers for entry into any ISP Internet business are low,
with several thousand service providers in the United States alone.
Some of them are even offering the service for free. No matter how
generous I make my growth estimates for AOL, and even allowing for
a historically high price/earnings ratio of 40 to 1,1 still cannot come


--- PAGE 30 ---
L A U E I i
up with an implied market capitalization greater than $15 to $20 bil-
lion. Yet the market currently values AOL at about $ 160 billion, and it
was as high as $200 billion. This figure is higher than the entire ISP
Internet business is going to be for some time to come.
If a stock routinely has daily trading ranges of 20 percent or more,
without any substantive news, you know that the market has no idea
how to value it. It's all driven by flow of funds, and if the flow of funds
into the highest capitalization stocks diminishes, then AOL will cer-
tainly suffer disproportionately. It is interesting how rational money
managers become in a bear market. Only then do they begin to ques-
tion the underlying valuations.
Okay, continue with your list of stock selection factors.
The fifth screen is value. The value has to be extremely compelling.
How do you measure value?
We use some conventional measures, such as price to sales, cash flow,
book value, but not necessarily price to earnings because, as I pointed
out before, the company could actually be losing money on a reported
basis. The most important measure of value, however, which I admit
is somewhat subjective, is price to intrinsic, or private market, value.
What do you mean by private market value?
It is my assessment of what the company would be worth to an
acquiring company in the same business that may decide it is cheaper
and more expeditious to buy its earnings growth on Wall Street than
to develop it internally. In other words, private market value is what I
estimate I can sell the business for to a competitor or possibly a finan-
cial buyer.
What is the final element in your selection process?
All five of the factors we discussed so far are defensive in nature,
focused on capital preservation. They are designed to diminish risk
but do not automatically translate into a significant money-making
opportunity. All five could be in place and the stock may still fail to
move. The key question is: What is going to make the stock go up? It
is our task to identify and time that catalyst. Based on experience, the
more severely depressed the valuation and the more pessimism that
surrounds the stock, the less it actually takes to reverse the market's
perception and trigger a price recovery.
IHE WISDOM OF V A L U E , THE F O L L Y OF FAD
Give me some examples of catalysts.
A company restructuring that significantly addresses the isolated
problem that drove the stock down in the first place, a realization that
the company will shift from deficit to profitability, or any other such
significant corporate development. It needs to be an event that will
change the investment community's expectations for the company.
Can you provide an example of an actual stock you bought based
on this selection process?
Let's stay with Tektronix, which we bought in late 1998. It met each
of the six screening criteria.
First, the company is in a niche technology sector that is easy to
follow, and we have known key management personnel for a decade.
Second, the stock had dropped from nearly $50 in early 1998 to
$15 later that year—a decline of 70 percent.
Third, the company had an easily manageable debt level and a
positive cash flow.
Fourth, Tektronix had already repurchased three million shares
and had board approval for the repurchase of another five million.
These were sizeable quantities relative to the approximate fifty mil-
lion total shares outstanding before the buyback commenced. In
addition, key management had also made meaningful purchases.
Fifth, the value was compelling. As I mentioned earlier, the total
capitalization of the company was equal to less than 25 percent of its
annual revenues. It was also selling at a discount to its book value and
at a fraction of its private market value.
Sixth, there was an identifiable catalyst that could be timed. The
company had three businesses: printers, measurement instrumenta-
tion, and video-editing equipment. The first two of these businesses
were sound, with strong market shares and good profit margins. The
third, the video-editing unit, although by far the smallest and least
significant of the three, was bleeding profusely and the key culprit
behind the company's woes. Through our research, we concluded
that a decision would be made to extricate the company from this
underperforming unit. We felt that once the market realized that Tek-
tronix would get rid of its video-editing business, its stock would soar,
based on its remaining healthy printer and instrumentation divisions,


--- PAGE 31 ---
which we estimated were worth $35 per share on their own, with a
private market value substantially north of that.
You've been pretty specific about how you select your stocks.
How do you decide when to get out? When and why did you get
out of Tektronix?
My typical target is a double within twelve months. Unless I believe
the stock has that potential, I probably will not be interested. In the
case of Tektronix, the stock hit the double less than six months after
we bought it, and we significantly reduced our position. Usually,
when I get out of a stock, I still believe there is at least 20 or 30 per-
cent left on the upside, but the key question is whether I can get a
better risk-adjusted return somewhere else.
So once a stock you buy approximately doubles, the question is
no longer, "Will it move higher?" but rather, "Can I buy some-
thing else that will give me a higher return with less risk?"
Yes, it comes back to the notion that we restrict ourselves to fifteen
stocks. If we have a position in the portfolio, it means that it still has
to be more attractive on a risk-reward basis than any other opportu-
nity we could find as a replacement.
The methodology you described obviously only applies to stocks
you buy. What is the difference between the way you approach
short positions versus long positions?
In our typical long position, we are looking to buy stocks that are
grossly undervalued, and we are prepared to hold those positions for
twelve months, or even longer. In contrast, in our short positions, we
are looking for stocks that will experience a shortfall relative to Wall
Street's expectations in the near term, and our anticipated exposure
period is, at most, a couple of weeks.
Also, on the long side, we never use stops because we are so intri-
cately familiar with the companies we buy and the stocks are so low-
priced relative to their intrinsic value that we consider the risk
manageable. On the short side, however, because the risk is theoreti-
cally unlimited, we will use stops to limit our losses, no matter how
persuasive the bearish argument may be.
Sometimes this backfires. For example, one of our shorts several
years ago was Thermolase. The company had developed a laser hair-
itif W I S D O M O F V A L U E , T H E F O L L Y O F F A D
removal treatment. Our information was that the treatment didn't
work well and was painful. The very fact that one could make an
appointment without any waiting told me that something was wrong.
Only one clinic—and you could get an appointment right away—and
the market is valuing the stock at over $1 billion! It was absurd. We
sold the stock at around $31 to $32. After I got short, I didn't like the
price action, and I was concerned about a short squeeze. I ended up
covering the position at around $35 to $36. The stock eventually col-
lapsed to $1. I had it nailed. I was dead right in my analysis, but let's
be honest, I chickened out.
On the long side, you only buy stocks that your analysis tells you
have very limited risk. On the short side, you will stop yourself
out before a stock goes very far against you. Did your risk control
strategy ever fail? Was there ever a situation where you took a
large loss?
I sustained a terrific loss in my personal account during the October
1987 crash. All the stocks that I owned at the time were very cheap,
using the same criteria we talked about earlier. However, there was a
technical breakdown in the market. In one day, the Dow was down
over 25 percent, and the small caps [small capitalization stocks],
which is what I owned, were down by a third. In that type of market,
where there are no bidders, it doesn't make any difference what you
own; everything collapses. That in itself might not have been cata-
strophic, as the market eventually recovered. The problem was that I
was heavily leveraged, and I had a huge margin call. Although I could
have borrowed the money to cover my margin call, I thought doing so
would be unwise. It was a valuable, albeit traumatic, lesson in the
evils of leverage.
How much did you lose?
I don't remember the exact intramonth figures, but I can tell you that
I was up over 100 percent for nine months going into the fourth quar-
ter, and I finished the year only slightly above breakeven.
How did you feel during the October crash, especially given the
fact you were so heavily leveraged?
It didn't seem to hurt at all. It was quite surreal, a bit of that anes-
thetized feeling. It was such a universal phenomenon that it certainly


--- PAGE 32 ---
MiCHJEL LAUE1
did not feel like a personal debacle. I knew I had the privilege of liv-
ing through a historical event. It was a priceless education—the fact
that you could lose control of a portfolio because of exogenous fac-
tors, such as a technical breakdown in the markets—and it also cre-
ated a lifelong aversion to leverage.
You were an analyst before you were a money manager. Is there
an inherent sense of conflict being an analyst for a stock when
you don't like the company, because it's politically incorrect to
say that?
It's much more than that. There is an inherent conflict between you
and your client. Your client wants to make money, and you want to
generate maximum commissions; that is the sell-side [brokerage firm]
analyst's number one priority. Hence there is a bias for recommenda-
tions that are easily saleable by the sales force—stocks that enjoy pos-
itive market perceptions and are ultraliquid so that firms can transact
a maximum number of shares. Any exceptional money-making poten-
tial of the idea, or risk to capital if market perceptions turn negative,
is strictly an afterthought. Recommending stocks that are deemed as
potentially stigmatizing in a client's portfolio because of recent disap-
pointments, or recommending stocks that offer less-than-optimal
trading volumes, is not a fast-lane strategy for an analyst in the sell-
side popularity derby. In fact, the institutional sales force would be
openly critical of an analyst who wasted time on stocks that were
more difficult to sell.
What made you decide to make the transition from analyst to
money manager?
I had done well trading my own account for many years, and I wanted
to devote full time to stock picking, which had always been my pas-
sion. As a sell-sider, nearly 80 percent of my time was spent on mar-
keting, and the research was often too oriented on maintenance.
Another attraction was that, as a portfolio manager, my universe of
potential ideas would expand dramatically. Also, although I certainly
wasn't underpaid as an analyst, I was well aware of the economic
potential implied by the remuneration-for-performance structure of a
hedge fund. Finally—and I hesitate to say this because I don't want to
sound arrogant—one of the things that gave me confidence in going
THE W I S D O M OF VffllF., THE F O L L Y OF FAD
out on my own was that the fund managers were my clients when 1
was an analyst, and I thought they would not be particularly difficult
to compete against.
Your company literature states that you have a policy of not dis-
closing your positions. Why?
There are three reasons. The first applies only to shorting stocks. If a
CEO sees that you are shorting his stock, he will likely never again be
easily accessible. I remember in the days when I was an analyst, there
were several occasions when I wrote what could be termed as bearish
reports. Ironically, almost all of these reports involved companies
whose stock I originally liked and had recommended for purchase.
In one typical example, the stock nearly tripled because of huge
earnings advances during the recovery phase following a previous
earnings shortfall. At that point, the market was assuming this growth
rate, which was clearly unsustainable, would be a permanent fixture. I
wrote a report stating that the company would see respectable growth
rates, but would not come close to matching the inflated expectations
of the market. Mind you, I only recommended taking profits, not
going short. After that report, the management suddenly became
much less accessible. The same thing happened to me as a fund man-
ager when I listed my short positions—the access to these companies
would be permanently compromised. And, remember, frequent con-
tact with companies' executives^ an essential part of what we do.
Second, when I disclose my positions, there is a lot of coattailing.
Wouldn't that help you? If you were already long, wouldn't oth-
ers following your position by buying the stock push it in your
favor?
We don't normally put on an entire position at one time. If I disclosed
my positions, a stock would show up on the list as soon as the initial
purchases were made, well before the entire intended position was
implemented. Therefore, having others coattail my trades could actu-
ally prevent me from being able to buy the bulk of a stock position at
a desirable purchase price.
And, the third reason for not disclosing your positions?
I think of myself as a reasonably courteous person. If an investor
called and asked me why I owned a certain stock, I would probably


--- PAGE 33 ---
MIWBH L A U E R
tell him. But in the process, I would certainly be wasting my time,
because I would be talking to this investor instead of researching new
ideas. Moreover if a stock that we were known as owning dropped,
then I would get a lot of these queries.
But the most irritating calls were the ones questioning why I was
buying stocks that appeared to have lousy fundamentals. Remember,
I'm seeking pricing inefficiencies, not high-quality companies. In
fact, as a direct consequence of my methodology, my typical long
position will be a company that has had some difficulty, while my typ-
ical short will be a universally admired entity. This concept is coun-
terintuitive to many. My research involves not only knowing the
fundamentals intricately, but also being aware of the investment com-
munity's perception of the company. If a stock has just gotten
slammed from $50 to $15, and the major funds have just finished
dumping their last shares of the company, I submit that they may
have created a terrific pricing inefficiency.
If, however, an investor brings up the stock on his screen, he will
see that the company lost money, or that the revenues are soft, or that
there have been some negative commentaries and analyst recommen-
dation downgrades. Well, that's why the stock is down from $50 to
$15 and why it is probably close to a bottom, with much of the risk
expunged. What am I going to do? Constantly repeat the rationale for
our decision process every time I get one of these calls? And, frankly,
I was losing my patience, because I'm Lancer's largest investor, with
nearly all of my net worth tied to its fortunes.
Although we no longer disclose our positions, I keep our investors
intimately familiar with our strategy and present investment themes
by writing a monthly update letter and hosting a quarterly confer-
ence call.
Any final words?
Any investment approach that is dependent on stock market direction
for profitability is doomed to mediocrity. Any investment approach
that is heavily reliant on accurate forecasting or involves the purchase
of high-expectation stocks is inherently risky. Market supply and
demand forces create spectacular pricing inefficiencies. All that is
required for successful investing is the commonsense analysis of
today's facts and the courage to act on your convictions.
Michael Lauer's market philosophy is perhaps best summarized
by his comment that "this business is not about investing in great
companies, it's about profiting from inefficiently priced stocks." The
crucial point is that fundamentals are not bullish or bearish in a vac-
uum; they are bullish or bearish only relative to price. The greatest
company in the world could be a terrible investment if its price rise
has already more than discounted the bullish fundamentals. Con-
versely, a company that has been bombarded with negative news
could be a great buy if its price decline has more than discounted the
bearish information.
Lauer believes in concentrating his portfolio into a small number
of holdings (fifteen stocks typically account for 75 percent or more
of assets). He believes broad diversification is a recipe for mediocrity:
"The greater the number of stocks you hold, the more marketlike
your performance becomes."
To winnow down the universe of U.S. stocks to a mere fifteen
core positions requires a very restrictive selection process. To end up
on Lauer's short list, a stock must pass six screens:
1. It must be a company and sector that Lauer fully understands.
(Obviously, this same principle would yield entirely different
results for different investors.)
2. The stock must have experienced a mammoth price decline rela-
tive to the market averages (50 percent or more). This rule will
cause Lauer to focus only on stocks that have been experiencing
wholesale liquidation, often by institutions. In effect, the only
stocks potentially good enough for Lauer are those that other
managers can't stand to hold.
3. The company must have a strong balance sheet and reasonable
cash flow.
4. There must be either insider buying or a company repurchase
program or both.


--- PAGE 34 ---
M I C H A E L L A U E R
5. The stock must represent compelling value (e.g., large revenues
relative to total capitalization, price near book value).
6. There must be a catalyst that will make the stock move in the
near future. Otherwise, although the preceding four conditions
will limit declines, the stock could just sit where it is for years,
tying up valuable capital.
Lauer will typically liquidate a stock when he still believes it will
move higher. The crucial point is that once a stock has risen suffi-
ciently, other available opportunities may offer a better return/risk
profile. Thus, the key question is not "Will the stock move higher?"
but rather "Is this stock still a better investment than any other
equity I can hold with the same capital?"
Short positions differ from long positions in two critical ways:
First, the intended holding period is much shorter than for long posi-
tions (a week or so versus three to eighteen months). Second, since
the potential loss on short positions is unlimited, stops are employed
to limit losses. The one similarity between short and long positions is
that they both require a catalyst. In fact, for short positions, this may
be the single overriding issue, as the timing is typically motivated by
an expected event (e.g., a disappointing earnings report).
Lauer offers two other important concepts. First, superior per-
formance requires not only picking the right stock but also having
the conviction to implement major potential trades in meaningful
size. As Lauer explains, a small position in a great stock pick is tanta-
mount to a mistake. Second, the size and direction of major fund
holdings provide important information. For example, if major funds
are large holders of a given stock and then begin to reduce their posi-
tion, then the stock is likely to be under relative pressure for months.
What about Lauer's warnings that the S&P 500 index funds and
what he terms the "enhanced" or "closet" index funds are filled with
overvalued stocks? Clearly, this is advice that has a limited shelf life.
If by the time you read this book, the same general condition still
prevails (lopsidedly high price/earnings ratios for the highest capital-
ization stocks), then for better or worse, you will still have the oppor-
tunity to act on Lauer's advice.
However, what if, by the time you read this book, a decline in the
index and "closet" index funds relative to the broader stock market is
history?—in other words, Lauer was right, but it is too late as far as
you are concerned. Even though in this case it may be too late to
take the literal advice, several very important, timeless lessons are
still embedded in this section of the interview. First, a strategy that
may make perfect sense for a small minority of investors (for exam-
ple, index funds) can break down if too large a segment of the market
follows the same approach. Second, the most popular positions can
often be among the riskiest. Third, it is important to understand why
an investment (stock or fund) outperformed in the past. Continued
superior performance in the future can be assumed only if the same
conditions still prevail.


--- PAGE 35 ---
STEVE WATSON
Dialing for Dollars
Steve Watson has never had a problem taking risks. He fondly recalls the
childhood summer ritual of catching snakes with his cousin in the Ozark
Mountains. When he was eleven, he and his cousin thought it would be
"fun" to move up from capturing nonpoisonous snakes to the poisonous
variety. They found two large water moccasins. After pinning each snake
down with a long branch and grabbing it tightly just below the head,
they decided it would be a good idea to carry their quarry back to the
family cabin, approximately a mile downriver, to proudly show their
fathers what they had caught. After sloshing through the shallow river for
about half a mile, with the snakes wrapped around their arms and their
hands tiring from the tight grip needed to keep the snakes' heads immo-
bile, they had some second thoughts. "Maybe this wasn't such a good
idea," they agreed. Finally, unable to maintain their grips for much
longer, they hurled the snakes into the water and darted in the opposite
direction. In comparison, buying and shorting stocks must seem pretty
tame.
Watson has also been willing to take risks in his career. Two years
after becoming a broker, he faced the growing realization that he had
chosen the wrong path toward fulfilling his goal to trade stocks, so he
quit and set off for New York. He did so without the comfort of any
business contacts, job leads, or supportive resume. In fact, there was
absolutely no logical reason for Steve Watson to succeed in his quest—
other than his determination. Several years later, he quit a secure job
with a major fund to start his own hedge fund. He launched his new
business without even enough money to rent office space.
54
When it comes to trading, however, Watson is willing to accept risk
but not to take risks. "You have to be willing to accept a certain level of
risk," Watson says, "or else you will never pull the trigger." But he
believes in keeping the risk under firm control. His net long position is
typically less than 50 percent of assets, often significantly less. Since
starting his fund four and a half years ago his worst drawdown from an
equity peak to a subsequent low has been just under 4 percent—the
same level as his average monthly return after deducting fees. In terms of
return to risk, this performance places him at the very top tier of fund
managers.
One of the major lessons that I have learned by conducting the inter-
views for the Market Wizard books is that, invariably, successful traders
end up using a methodology that fits their personality. Watson has cho-
sen an approach that is heavily dependent on communicating with and
getting information from other people, a style that is a good match for his
easygoing manner. Asked whether he found it difficult to get people who
were often complete strangers to take the time to speak with him, Wat-
son said, "My father is one of the nicest people you could ever hope to
meet. One thing he taught me was, 'Don't treat anyone differently than
you would your best friends.' I find if you approach people with that atti-
tude, most of the time they will try to help you out."
I met with Watson in a conference room at his firm's Manhattan
office. He was relaxed and friendly, and spoke with an accent that
reflected his Arkansas origins.
When did you first get interested in the stock market?
I came from a family that never read The Wall Street Journal, never
bought a share of stock, and never invested in mutual funds. I didn't
know anything about the stock market until I was in college. When I
attended the University of Arkansas, I took an investment course that
sparked my interest.
What about the course intrigued you?
Doing research on a stock. As a main project for the course, we were
required to pick a stock and write a report on it. My group picked a
local utility company that was experiencing some trouble. We did our


--- PAGE 36 ---
WATSON
analysis and came to the conclusion that it was a terrible company.
We were all prepared to trash the stock in our presentation.
The day before the presentation, someone in our group came up
with the bright idea of going to the local brokerage office and seeing
what they said about the stock. The brokerage firm had this beautiful
glossy report on the company, which was filled with all sorts of posi-
tive commentary and concluded with a recommendation to buy the
stock. Here we were, a group of undergraduate students taking an
elementary investment course, and we thought that since these guys
get paid to do this for a living, we must be wrong. We completely
transformed our report so that it reached a positive conclusion, even
though it was the exact opposite of what we believed.
The next day, we gave our presentation, and the professor just tore
it apart. "This is a terrible company!" he exclaimed, citing a list of rea-
sons to support his conclusion—all of which had been in our original
report. Of course, we couldn't say anything [he laughs].
What ultimately happened to the stock?
It went down. That's when I learned my first and most important les-
son about the stock market: Stick to your own beliefs.
Did that course clinch your decision to pursue a career in the
stock market?
Yes. After I graduated, I moved to Dallas, which was the only big city I
had ever visited, to look for a job as a stockbroker. I thought being a
stockbroker meant that you got to manage other people's money and
play the stock market all day long. I quickly found out that it was more
of a sales job, and quite frankly, I'm a terrible salesperson. I picked up
my largest client because his own broker wouldn't answer the phone on
the day of the October 1987 stock market crash—he couldn't face talk-
ing to his customers—and 1 was the only one his client could reach.
After I was there for about two years, I remember calling up my
dad and saying, "I don't like being a stockbroker. All 1 do is cold-call
people all day, trying to sell them stuff they probably don't need in the
first place." Verbalizing my feelings helped me decide to quit. I knew
I really wanted to be a money manager. I moved to New York City to
find a job more closely aligned with my goal.
Had you been successful picking stocks as a broker?
No, I had been very unsuccessful.
What then gave you the confidence that you could manage
money successfully?
I didn't expect to get a job managing money on day one. I just wanted
to break into the business. Once I decide I am going to do something,
I become determined to succeed, regardless of the obstacles. If I
didn't have that attitude, I never would have made it.
When I arrived in New York, I didn't have any contacts, and my
resume—a 2.7 GPA from Arkansas University—and two years' experi-
ence as a stockbroker were certainly not going to impress anyone. I
couldn't compete against people who had gone to Harvard and
interned at Goldman Sachs. Therefore, I had to do it the hard way. I
went to work for an insurance company, doing credit analysis, essen-
tially to pay the bills, but also to gain some analytical experience. I
also applied to business school at NYU but couldn't get in. I enrolled
at Fordham University for a semester, received good grades, and then
transferred.
After I graduated, I interviewed with about forty different hedge
fund managers, which was very helpful, because it gave me a feeling
for what other people were doing. I landed a job at Bankers Trust
working in the small cap department [group that invested in stocks
with small capitalization]. Even though 1 was new to the game, the
reason I was hired was that I knew small cap stocks better than any-
one else. I can't tell you how many nights I stayed up until 3 A.M.,
flipping through stocks on the Bloomberg. At that point, I probably
knew something about every exchange-listed stock under the $300
million market cap level.
Why had you decided to focus on small cap stocks?
Small caps have always been a love for me because I can't get an edge
on stocks like Microsoft or Intel. I can't call up the CFOs of those
companies. In college, even though 1 didn't have a job, I would call
up CFOs, tell them that I was doing a project on their company, and
ask them questions. I had stacks of company reports filling up my
apartment.


--- PAGE 37 ---
STEWiSWATSON
What were your responsibilities at Bankers Trust?
I worked as Bill Newman's right-hand person for one of the firm's two
small cap funds. He gave me tremendous leeway. If I liked an idea, he
let me go with it. It was almost as if I were a portfolio manager
because he rarely turned down one of my stock picks. Unfortunately,
he left the firm three months after I joined. I didn't get along with his
replacement—our investment philosophies clashed.
In what way?
My new boss—who, incidentally, was one of the worst stock pickers I
have ever seen—was a momentum player who believed in buying
high P/E stocks [stocks trading at large multiples of their earnings]
that were moving up rapidly, whereas I believed in buying value
stocks and doing a lot of detailed research on a company. I left about
a half year later, and after another extensive Wall Street job search
found a job with Friess Associates, which ran the Brandywine Fund.
What job were you hired for?
Officially, 1 was hired as a consultant because I worked in a satellite
office. At the time, the firm's main branch was located in Wilmington,
Delaware, and I worked in Manhattan. The way Friess operated was
that everyone was both a research analyst and portfolio manager.
They used what they called "a-pig-at-the-trough" approach. If you
found a stock that you liked and wanted to buy you had to convince
one of the other people to liquidate one of their holdings to make
room in the portfolio, just like one pig has to push another pig out of
the way if he wants to get a spot at the trough.
How long were you there?
About two years.
Why did you leave?
The assets of the fund were growing rapidly. I love small cap stocks.
But the assets of the fund were getting too large to bother with small
cap stocks, and the fund's focus shifted almost exclusively to mid cap
and large cap stocks, which made it harder to get a hold of the CFOs
and ask questions. Also, as the assets grew, the number of analysts
increased. When there are fifteen analysts, your performance doesn't
have too much impact on the fund. I wanted to be in a situation
where I had control over the performance. I decided to leave to start
my own fund.
Where did you get the money to start your fund?
At the time, I only had about $20,000 to my name. I went to a few
CFOs to whom I had given stock tips for their own personal
accounts—recommendations that had worked out very well for them.
I only raised $700,000 in assets; I'm the worst salesman in the world.
But that was enough to start the fund.
How did you cover your operating expenses?
I was extremely lucky. Ed McGuinn, the man from whom I was rent-
ing office space at the time, wanted to help me get started. He knew I
couldn't afford to rent space on .my own, so he let me have the use of
a small office for free. It was the smallest office I had ever seen—
about 12 feet by 5—but I was extremely grateful. He even paid the
monthly fee for my Bloomberg.
I noticed that in your first year as a fund manager, your net expo-
sure was considerably higher, probably double what it has been
since then. Why is that?
I had a different risk/reward perspective the first year because I was
managing less than $ 1 million. I allowed my net exposure to get up to
70 to 80 percent and individual positions to get as high as 5 or 6 per-
cent of assets. As a result, we had triple-digit returns that year.
How do you select the stocks you buy?
We have two funds: the microfund, which invests in companies with a
market capitalization of under $350 million, and a small cap fund that
invests in companies with a capitalization of $350 million to $1.5 bil-
lion. In both funds, we begin by looking for companies that are rela-
tively cheap—trading between eight to twelve times earnings. Within
this group, we try to identify those companies for which investors'
perceptions are about to change. Typically, these may be companies
that are having some trouble now, but their business is about to turn
around. We try to find out that information before everyone else does.
How do you do that?
We make a lot of phone calls. The difference between our firm and
most other hedge funds is that talking to companies is our primary


--- PAGE 38 ---
S T E V E W A T S O N ;
focus. I have two people who spend three-quarters of their time book-
ing calls with company management and five research people who
spend virtually their entire day calling companies and talking to
CFOs.
In this business, you can't wait for a new product to come out and
be successful. By that time, you will have to pay three times as much
for the stock. We are trying to add value by doing our own research. If
you are buying stocks that are washed out—stocks that are trading at
only eight to twelve times earnings—any significant change can dra-
matically impact the stock price.
Won't CFOs tend to paint a rosy picture of their company?
Of course. You can't go strictly by what they say. CFOs are only
human, and they will tend to exaggerate how well their company is
doing. But we also speak to distributors, customers, and competi-
tors. If we are going to own something, we're going to talk not only
to the company, but also to the people selling and using their prod-
ucts.
What did you teach your research people about doing phone
interviews?
You want the other person to be on your side. Don't ever tell a CFO
he is wrong or try to tell him how to run his business. If you do, he
probably won't take your phone call the next time. You also have to
ask questions the right way. You don't want to ask a CFO a direct
question such as, "What are earnings going to be this quarter?"
because, obviously, he can't tell you. But if instead you ask him about
how his company will be affected by a product his competitor is put-
ting out, you may well get some useful information. We are detec-
tives. We are trying to find out information that is not widely
dispersed and then put all the pieces together to get an edge.
What else do you look for when you buy a stock?
A low price and the prospect for imminent change are the two key
components. Beyond that, it also helps if there is insider buying by
management, which confirms prospects for an improvement in the
company outlook.
Is insider buying something that you look at regularly?
Yeah, but I'd rather not put that in print.
Why not?
Because I don't want to give away secrets.
But insider buying is not exactly a secret. In fact, it came up in a
number of other interviews I did for this book.
Over the course of the two times in my career that I looked for a job
on Wall Street, I must have interviewed with as many as eighty firms.
I was amazed by how many hedge fund managers used charts and
sell-side information [brokerage research] but didn't use insider buy-
ing. In fact, I had a lot of managers tell me that using insider buying
was stupid [he laughs].
Stock investing is not an exact science. The greater the number of
useful things you can look at, the greater you increase your odds. The
odds are better that we will make correct investment decisions if we
talk to a company than if we don't talk to them. Similarly, if we focus
on companies with insider buying, it doesn't mean that these stocks
will go up, but it certainly improves our odds.
Do you also mean to imply that you don't use charts or Wall
Street research?
I never looked at a chart for 99 percent of the stocks I bought for our
funds.
Is the reason you don't use charts because you tried using them
but couldn't find any value or because you never explored this
avenue of research?
Too many people use charts. If too many people are using an
approach, I feel that I can't get a competitive edge.
What about brokerage research? Is that also something you never
use?
I will look at analysts' earnings estimates because part of my job is to
find out whether a company is doing better or worse than people per-
ceive. But I have never called a sell-side analyst to ask for an opinion.
Don't get me wrong; there are some great analysts out there. But it
really comes down to my philosophy: It's much more valuable to do
your own research so that you can make your own decisions about
when to get in and out.
If I buy a company because of an analyst's recommendation, and
the stock suddenly drops 20 percent, I'm going to be dependent on


--- PAGE 39 ---
STifl W A T S O N
that analyst for information. If I call the analyst and he says, "Every-
thing is fine," and then try to call the CFO of the company, he may
well not return my call because he doesn't know who I am. In the
meantime, he's talking to ten other people with whom he has built a
relationship. If I was the guy who built the relationship with the com-
pany, maybe I would be the first person the CFO called back.
Another aspect is that sell-side research tends to be biased; it is
driven by investment banking relationships. If a brokerage firm earns
several million dollars doing an underwriting for a stock, it is very dif-
ficult for an analyst of that firm to issue anything other than a buy rat-
ing, even if he believes the company has significant problems. Some
of my research analysts have good friends who are sell-side analysts
and have seen them pressured to recommend stocks they didn't like.
Let's say a stock is trading in the 8 to 12 P/E range and you like
the fundamentals. How do you decide when to buy it? Obviously,
you're not using any technical analysis for timing, since you don't
even look at charts.
You need a catalyst that will make the stock go higher.
Give me an example of a catalyst that prompted you to buy a
stock.
A current example is Amerigon. Two weeks ago, they put out a press
release announcing a five-year agreement with Ford Motors to manu-
facture ventilated car seats. The press release didn't contain much
information about the size of the contract. But by talking not only to
the company but also to someone at Ford, we know the contract is
huge. We also know that they're working on similar agreements with
the other car manufactures.
What is another example of a catalyst?
A change that will lead to a dynamic improvement in margins.
Another one of our long positions is Windmere, which is a manufac-
turer of personal care products, such as hair dryers. Last year, they
bought a division of Black & Decker and overpaid for it. The high
operating costs of the acquired division acted as a drag on their earn-
ings. We bought the stock recently when we learned that the com-
pany planned to close down some of these unprofitable facilities—an
action that will bring their costs down and lead to better-than-
expected earnings in coming quarters.
Any other examples of a catalyst?
Sometimes the catalyst can be a new product. One of our biggest
winners last year was LTXX, a semiconductor company. They had
come out with a new product, and by talking to their customers, we
knew the sales were going to be very good. Wall Street didn't know
about it because the sales of this new product hadn't shown up in
earnings reports. When the earnings starting showing up above
expectations, the stock took off.
If you buy a stock and it moves higher, when do you decide to liq-
uidate the position?
Too early [he laughs}. We are always rotating our stocks. If we buy a
stock at ten times earnings and it goes up, usually by the time it gets
to twenty times earnings, we are out of it. We will rotate the money
down to another stock with similar qualities so that we can keep the
risk/reward of the portfolio as low as possible. LTXX is a good exam-
ple. We started buying the stock around $5 and got out when it went
up to $15, even though our earnings projections for the stock were
still positive. Today the stock is trading at $45. That's fairly typical.
But that same trait of liquidating stocks too early has also helped us
during market declines because we're not long the stocks with the
high price/earnings ratios that get hit hardest in a market correction.
If you buy a stock and it just sits there, at what point do you
decide to get out?
If it looks like dead money and what I originally thought would hap-
pen is not happening, then it's probably better to just move on.
In other words, you liquidate once it becomes clear that the rea-
sons you went in are no longer valid?
Or because I have a better idea. We're working with a finite amount of
money. Consequently, it's important to stay invested in your best ideas.
How many positions do you have at one time?
Over a hundred. We won't let any single position get very large. Our
largest holding will be about 3 percent of assets, and even that is rare.
For shorts, our maximum position will be half that large.


--- PAGE 40 ---
What is your balance between long and short positions?
Our total exposure will normally range between about 20 and 50 per-
cent net long, although it could be even lower if 1 get very bearish on
the market. Right now we're about 80 percent long and 40 percent
short, which is fairly typical. We've always kept a pretty good-size
short position and will continue to do so. Part of the reason for that is
that I am a perennial bear.
A perennial bear in the greatest bull market in history—that
doesn't like a beneficial trait. Why do you have a bearish bias?
Thank goodness we've been able to make money anyway. I have felt
this way for a while, but certainly now [March 2000], I think we are
seeing a mania in certain sectors, such as the Internet and technology.
Valuations are up there in the ozone layer. It is no different from the
market manias we've seen in the past: the Russian market a few years
ago, the Japanese market during the 1980s, the real estate market in
the 1970s, even the Dutch tulip craze in the seventeenth century.
Right now, when everyone's golf buddy is making money buying these
stocks, there's a lot of peer pressure to follow the group. You have a
locomotive while prices are going up, but the problem is, what happens
when the locomotive stops and reverses direction, as it invariably will.
Are we near a top or will the top form three years from now? I
can't answer that question. All I can do is control the factors over
which I have an influence. I can control the number of CFOs and
customers we talk to each day, but I can't determine what the market
is going to do.
Isn't it difficult to talk to the CFOs of companies you are short-
ing? I imagine they wouldn't be too eager to talk to managers
who are selling their stock.
We don't really talk to CFOs on the short side anymore.
Because of the access problem?
No, because we got talked out of some of our best short positions. In
earlier years, there were a number of times when I changed my mind
about selling a stock because a CFO assured me that everything was
fine, and then the stock tanked. If we are considering a stock on the
short side, we spend a lot of time talking to customers, suppliers, and
competitors.
D I A L I N G F O R D O L L A R S
HOW do you select your short positions?
We certainly look for the higher-priced stocks—companies trading at
thirty to forty times earnings, or stocks that have no earnings. Within
that group, we seek to identify those companies with a flawed busi-
ness plan.
Give me an example of a flawed business plan.
My favorite theme for a short is a one-product company because if
that product fails, they have nothing else to fall back on. It's also
much easier to check out sales for a one-product company. A perfect
example is Milestone Scientific. The company manufactured a prod-
uct that was supposed to be a painless alternative to dental novocaine
shots. It sounded like a great idea, and originally we started looking at
the stock as a buy prospect. One of our analysts went to a dentistry
trade show and collected a bunch of business cards from attending
dentists. The primary Wall Street analyst covering the stock assumed
every dental office would be buying five of these instruments, and he
projected unbelievably huge earnings.
I visited the company in New Jersey. There were three people sit-
ting in rented offices who were outsourcing everything. We started call-
ing dentists and found the product didn't work as well as advertised; it
wasn't entirely painless, and it also took longer than novocaine to take
effect. Another crucial element was that the company sold the product
with a money-back guarantee. They booked all their shipments as rev-
enues and left themselves out on a limb in terms of product returns.
We also talked to the manufacturer to whom the company was
outsourcing their production and found out the number of units actu-
ally shipped as well as their future production plans. We could see
that the orders were slowing down dramatically on the manufacturing
side. The differences between reality and the Wall Street research
report were about as far apart as I have ever seen.
What ultimately happened to the stock?
It went down below one dollar.
Wasn't it difficult to get the manufacturer to talk to you in that
type of situation, let alone give you all that detailed information?
If you call, there's at least a chance the person will talk to you. One of
things I tell my analysts is, "Make the calls. Maybe they won't talk to


--- PAGE 41 ---
S T E V E W A T S O N
you, but I guarantee that if you don't call, they won't talk to you." In
this case, the manufacturer was very helpful at the start, but then
they wised up to what we were doing and stopped taking our calls.
But by then, we had all the information we needed.
What do you say when you call a manufacturer in this type of
situation?
I tell him the truth. I tell him that I am a fund manager and am doing
research on the company and the industry. In some cases, when we
call a company, we ask them to provide us with the names of some of
their top customers to help us evaluate their product.
Does giving you this information sometimes work against the
company because their customers don't like them as much as
they believe?
When I first started doing this I thought that contacting customers
supplied by a company would be like talking to references on a
resume—they would only say complimentary things. I was amazed
when this frequently proved not to be the case. I have often won-
dered whether a company had any idea what their customers really
thought about them. Sometimes we have found our best information
this way.
Any other examples of how you pick your short positions?
A good example is Balance Bars. You could walk into any GNC store
and see shelves loaded with competitive products and the price of
Balance Bar items marked down. Yet the stock was trading at a multi-
ple of thirty-five times earnings; it should have been trading at ten
times earnings.
That sounds a lot like Peter Lynch talking about getting trading
ideas by going to the mall with his family.
Peter Lynch has probably inspired me more than anyone else. I read his
book One Up on Wall Street at least ten times. One question I ask peo-
ple I interview is whether they've read his book. If they haven't, it tells
me they are not as serious about the stock market as they claim to be.
What aspect of the book do you personally find so valuable?
The message that it is critical to do your own research rather than
depending on Wall Street research.
D I A L I N G F O R D O L L A R S
What type of research?
Talking to companies and customers.
But the ordinary investor can't call up companies.
The ordinary investor may not be able to call up the company CFO,
but as Lynch advises, the nonprofessional can call the investor rela-
tions office and still get valuable information by asking the right ques-
tions. The gist of Lynch's advice to the ordinary investor is: Invest in
what you know—the company you work for (assuming it is doing
well), companies in the same industry, or companies that make a
product you can touch and feel. His point is that people would be
much better off investing in companies they understand than listen-
ing to their broker and investing in companies they know nothing
about. One part of Peter Lynch's philosophy is that if you can't sum-
marize the reasons why you own a stock in four sentences, you proba-
bly shouldn't own it.
Did you ever meet Peter Lynch?
I never met him, but I interviewed at Fidelity on several occasions. I
was obsessed with getting a job there because I wanted to be the next
Peter Lynch and eventually run the Magellan fund. The last time I
interviewed with Fidelity, which was right before I took the job at
Friess Associates, I got as far as meeting with Jeff Vinik [Lynch's ini-
tial successor as manager of the Magellan fund]. He asked me only
two questions, which will stick in my mind forever. First, he asked,
"What is the bond rate?" I was a stock guy who never paid attention to
the bond market. I subsequently learned that Vinik pays very close
attention to interest rates because he trades a lot of bonds. His sec-
ond question was, "You're twenty-nine years old; what took you so
long?" The interview was over in less than five minutes.
Do you, like Peter Lynch, get trading ideas by going to the mall?
All the time. I love going to malls. Investing is not as complicated as
people make it out to be. Sometimes it just requires common sense.
Anyone can go to the mall and see that a store like Bombay is empty
and the Gap is filled with people. If you go to four or five malls and
see the same thing, there is a reason for it. Bombay hasn't had the
right products to make people want to buy their stuff for years,


--- PAGE 42 ---
whereas the Gap is continually changing with the times and getting in
fresh inventories that meet their customers' needs.
Does that imply that you bought the Gap and shorted Bombay?
We don't trade the Gap because we only trade small cap stocks. We
have been short Bombay from time to time.
What are examples of trades that were largely inspired by mall
visits?
Last Christmas I went to Men's Wearhouse because I needed a suit. I
hated the clothes, and I noticed the store was virtually empty. We did
some additional research to confirm the trade, but we ended up
shorting the stock.
How about on the long side?
One stock we bought is Claire's. I noticed that the store always
seemed to be mobbed with teenagers. We also liked their financials
and found their management very forthcoming.
We were talking about companies with flawed business plans.
Any other examples?
Enamalon. The company's single product was a toothpaste that sup-
posedly did a better job of whitening teeth. If they didn't spend a lot
of money on promotion and advertising, they would never get a toe-
hold in the highly competitive toothpaste market. On the other
hand, if they did spend enough to get widespread consumer recog-
nition, they would burn through most of their capital. It was a no-
win situation from the start. The other problem was that the
product cost a lot more than ordinary toothpaste but didn't work any
better. We had everyone in our office try it, and only one person
liked it.
You said the name of the company was Enamalon? I never heard
of the toothpaste.
Exactly, that's my point.
What happened to the stock?
The last time I checked, it was trading for one dollar.
It sounds like an important element in your decision to short this
stock was to have everyone in the office sample their product.
Any other examples of short ideas that were derived by "con-
sumer research"?
D I A L I N G F O R DOLLARS-ilS
[He searches his memory and then laughs.] One of our shorts was
Ultrafem. It was a one-product company that was trading at over a
$100 million capitalization. The product was a substitute for femi-
nine pads that used what the company termed "a soft cup technol-
ogy." The company had put out press releases trumpeting the
superiority of their product to conventional alternatives. I called the
manufacturer and got them to send me five free samples, which 1
gave to five women friends. After they tried it, they all came back to
me with virtually the same response: "You've got to be kidding!" I
shorted the stock. The stock was trading in the twenties when I con-
ducted my "market research;" it's now trading at three cents with a
market capitalization of $260,000.
Where did you get out?
We covered our position recently.
You held it all the way down!
This was probably my number one short pick of all time, but unfortu-
nately we had very few shares on the way down because we were
bought in on a lot of our stock.
By "bought in" do you mean that the stock you borrowed was
called back? [In order to short a stock, the seller must borrow
the shares he sells. If the lender of those shares requests their
return, the short seller must either borrow the shares elsewhere,
which may not be possible, or else buy back the shares in the
market.]
Exactly, and the stock was fully locked up [there weren't any shares
available to be borrowed]. That's when I learned that the short game
is very relationship dependent. If there is a scarcity of stock available
for borrowing and I'm competing with a large fund manager who
does more business with the brokerage firm than I do, guess who's
going to get those shares. This occurred back in 1997; we were a lot
smaller then.
Why would loaned shares be called back?
Because the investor requests the stock certificate in his name.
[Unless an investor specifically requests the stock certificate, the
stock will be held by the brokerage firm ("in the Street name") and
loanable.]


--- PAGE 43 ---
D I A L I N G F O R D O L L A R S
Why would an investor suddenly request receipt of his stock
certificate?
Companies whose stock price is very vulnerable because of weak fun-
damentals will often attract a lot of short selling. Sometimes these
companies will encourage their investors to request their stock certifi-
cates in their name, in the hopes of forcing shorts to cover their posi-
tions when the loaned stock is recalled. Sometimes a few firms will
buy up a large portion of the shares in a stock with a heavy short
interest and then call in the shares, forcing the shorts to cover at a
higher price. Then they will liquidate the stock for a quick profit.
Are you implying that large fund managers will sometimes get
together to squeeze the shorts?
It is illegal for portfolio managers to get together to push the price up
or down—that's considered market manipulation. Does it happen
anyway? Sure, it happens all the time. During the past five months,
just about every stock with a heavy short interest got squeezed at one
time or another.
Do most stocks that are squeezed eventually come down?
I am a firm believer that if a stock is heavily shorted, there is usually a
good fundamental reason. Most of the time, those stocks will end up
much lower. In the interim, however, even a near-valueless stock can
go up sharply due to an artificial scarcity of loanable shares.
How do you time your shorts? Certainly there are a lot of over-
priced stocks that just get more overpriced.
The timing is definitely the tough part. That is why we spread our
short position across so many stocks and use rigorous risk control on
our shorts. I don't mind if 1 have a long position that goes down 40
percent, as long as 1 still believe that the fundamentals are sound. If a
short goes 20 to 30 percent against us, however, we will start to cover,
even if my analysis of the stock is completely unchanged. In fact, I
will cover even if I am convinced that the company will ultimately go
bankrupt. I have seen too many instances of companies where every-
thing is in place for the stock to go to zero in a year, but it first quin-
tupled because the company made some announcement and the
shorts got squeezed. If that stock is a 1 percent short in our portfolio,
I'm not going to let it turn into a 5 percent loss. We've had a lot of
short positions that we closed out because they went against us and
that later on collapsed. But we are much more concerned about
avoiding a large loss than missing a profit opportunity.
The discussion of the inherent danger of being short a stock that is subject to
a squeeze leads to a conversation about Watson's childhood experience -with
•poisonous snakes, which was described at this chapter's opening.
Did you feel any fear while you were holding those snakes?
No, I would describe the feeling as closer to excitement. I was a
pretty hyperactive kid.
Is there anything that you are afraid of?
I'm going skydiving next week—that scares me.
Why is that?
I thought about that. I realized what scares me—things I can't con-
trol. When I held those snakes, I had control. I'm planning to learn
race car driving in Italy this year, and that doesn't scare me because I'll
have control of the car. But I have no control over the parachute. I just
hope that the person who prepares my chute doesn't have a bad day.
Why are you going skydiving if you have no control?
I just had my birthday this past Saturday; it was one of my gifts. I
don't have any choice. Maybe the person who gave me the present
will forget—but I doubt it [he laughs].
What do you look for when you hire an analyst?
For a number of reasons, everyone I hire is in their twenties. First,
they will work eighty to a hundred hours a week. Second, they haven't
made so much money that they will sit back and relax. Third, they
won't think twice about calling up a CFO, distributor, or customer. I
also hire people who want to win.
Picking stocks is as much an art as a science. There are some peo-
ple who no matter how hard they work, how much research they do,
or how many companies they call, will not succeed because they
don't have the knack of figuring out what is and isn't going to work.
Did you ever hire anyone who didn't work out?
The first person I hired. He was one of the smartest people I have
ever known. The problem was that he didn't have any intuition, and


--- PAGE 44 ---
he didn't get the risk side. For example, he would say, "We have to
short Yahoo at 10 because it is worth zero." He didn't have any
instinctive feel for what was going on in the market.
So much of your approach seems to be tied to speaking to com-
pany management. If tomorrow you awoke in the financial Twi-
light Zone and found yourself to be an ordinary investor instead
of a fund manager with hundreds of millions in assets, how
would you alter your approach?
Well, first of all I would still have a telephone. I might not be able to
call the CFO, but I could call other employees of the company, as
well as consumers and distributors of their products. Also, the Inter-
net today allows you to get a tremendous amount of information with-
out speaking to anyone. You can get the company's 10-Qs and 10-Ks
[the quarterly and annual company reports required to be filed by the
SEC], company press releases, insider trading statistics, and lots of
other valuable information. Also, I could still go to the mall and check
out a company's product, which is a big part of what we do.
Anything stand out as your best trade ever?
[He thinks for a while.] I usually don't get excited about winners; I'm
too busy looking for the next trade.
What lessons have you learned about investment?
Do the research and believe in your research. Don't be swayed by
other people's opinions.
Anything else?
You have to invest without emotions. If you let emotions get involved,
you will make bad decisions.
You can't be afraid to take a loss. The people who are successful in
this business are the people who are willing to lose money.
One of the most common trading blunders cited by the Market
Wizards is the folly of listening to others for advice—a mistake that
proved very costly to some (Walton and Minervini for example).
Steve Watson was lucky: He learned the lesson of not listening to
others' opinions from a college course instead of with his own money.
Watson begins his investment selection process by focusing on
stocks that are relatively low priced (low price/earnings ratio), a char-
acteristic that limits risk. A low price is a necessary but not sufficient
condition. Many low-priced stocks are low for a reason and will stay
relatively depressed. The key element of Watson's approach is to
anticipate which of these low-priced stocks are likely to enjoy a
change in investors' perceptions. In order to identify potential
impending changes that could cause a shift in market sentiment,
Watson conducts extensive communication with companies and
their competitors, consumers, and distributors. He is also a strong
proponent of such commonsense research as trying a company's
product, or in the case of a retailer, visiting its stores. Finally, Watson
looks for insider buying as a confirmation condition for his stock
selections.
Shorting is considered a high-risk activity and is probably inap-
propriate for the average investor. Nevertheless, Watson demon-
strates that if risk controls are in place to avoid the open-ended
losses that can occur in a short position, shorting can reduce portfo-
lio risk by including positions that are inversely correlated with the
rest of the portfolio. On the short side, Watson seeks out high-priced
companies that have a flawed business plan—often one-product
companies that are vulnerable either because the performance of
their single product falls far short of promotional claims or because
there is no barrier to entry for competitors.
Watson achieves risk control through a combination of diversifi-
cation, selection, and loss limitation rules. He diversifies his portfo-
lio sufficiently so that the largest long holdings account for a
maximum of 2 to 3 percent of the portfolio. Short positions are
capped at about 1.5 percent of the portfolio. The risk on long posi-
tions is limited by Watson's restricting the selection of companies
from the universe of low-priced stocks. On the short side, risk is lim-
ited by money management rules that require reducing or liquidating
a stock that is moving higher, even if the fundamental justification
for the trade is completely unchanged.
Watson has maintained the pig-at-the-trough philosophy he was
exposed to at Friess Associates. He is constantly upgrading his port-
folio—replacing stocks with other stocks that appear to have an even


--- PAGE 45 ---
better return/risk outlook. Therefore, he will typically sell a prof-
itable long holding even though he expects it to go still higher,
because after a sufficient advance, he will find another stock that
offers equal or greater return potential with less risk. The relevant
question is never, "Is this a good stock to hold?" but rather, "Is this a
better stock than any alternative holding that is not already in the
portfolio?"
DANA GALANTE
Against the Current
Imagine two swimmers a mile apart on a river who decide to have a race,
each swimming to the other's starting point. There is a strong current.
The swimmer heading downstream wins. Is she the better swimmer?
Obviously this is a nonsensical question. An Olympic swimmer could
lose to a novice if the current is strong enough.
Now consider two money managers: one only buys stocks and is up an
average of 25 percent per year for the period while the other only sells
stocks and is up 10 percent per year during the same period. Which man-
ager is the better trader? Again, this is a nonsensical question. The
answer depends on the direction and strength of the market's current—
its trend. If the stock market rose by an average of 30 percent per year
during the corresponding period, the manager with the 25 percent return
would have underperformed a dart-throwing strategy, whereas the other
manager would have achieved a double-digit return in an extraordinarily
hostile environment.
During 1994—99 Dana Galante registered an average annual com-
pounded return of 15 percent. This may not sound impressive until one
considers that Galante is a pure short seller. In reverse of the typical
manager, Galante will profit when the stocks in her portfolio go down and
lose when they go up. Galante achieved her 15 percent return during a
period when the representative stock index (the Nasdaq, which accounts
for about 80 percent of her trades) rose by an imposing annual average of
32 percent. To put Galante's performance in perspective, her achieve-
ment is comparable to a mutual fund manager averaging a 15 percent
annual return during a period when the stock market declines by an aver-
75


--- PAGE 46 ---
D A N A G A L A N T I
age of 32 percent annually. In both cases, overcoming such a powerful
opposite trend in the universe of stocks traded requires exceptional stock
selection skills.
Okay, so earning even a 15 percent return by shorting stocks in a
strongly advancing market is an admirable feat, but what's the point?
Even if the stock market gains witnessed in the 1990s were unprece-
dented, the stock market has still been in a long-term upward trend since
its inception. Why fight a trend measured in decades, if not centuries?
The point is that a short-selling approach is normally not intended as a
stand-alone investment; rather, it is intended to be combined with long
investments (to which it is inversely correlated) to yield a total portfolio
with a better return/risk performance. Most, if not all, of Galante's
investors use her fund to balance their long stock investments. Appar-
ently, enough investors have recognized the value of Galante's relative
performance so that her fund, Miramar Asset Management, is closed to
new investment.
Most people don't realize that a short-selling strategy that earns more
than borrowing costs can be combined with a passive investment, such
as an index fund or long index futures, to create a net investment that has
both a higher return than the index and much lower risk. This is true
even if the returns of the short-selling strategy are much lower than the
returns of the index alone. For example, an investor who balanced a Nas-
daq index-based investment with an equal commitment in Galante's
fund (borrowing the extra money required tor the dual investment)
would have both beaten the index return (after deducting borrowing
costs) and cut risk dramatically. Looking at one measure of risk, the two
worst drawdowns of this combined portfolio during 1994—99 would have
been 10 percent and 5 percent, versus 20 percent and 13 percent for the
index.
Galante began her financial career working in the back office of an
institutional money management firm. She was eventually promoted to a
trading (order entry) position. Surprisingly, Galante landed her first job as
a fund manager without any prior experience in stock selection. Fortu-
nately, Galante proved more skilled in picking stocks than in picking
bosses. Prior to founding her own firm in 1997, Galante's fourteen-year
career was marked by a number of unsavory employers.
• A G A I N S T T H E C U R «
Galante likes trading the markets and enjoys the challenge of trying to
profit by going the opposite of the financial community, which is long the
stocks that she shorts. But the markets are an avocation, not an all-
consuming passion. Her daily departure from the office is mental as well
as physical, marking a shift in her focus from the markets to her family.
She leaves work each day in time to pick up her kids up at school, a rou-
tine made possible by her western time zone locale, and she deliberately
avoids doing any research or trading at home.
The interview was conducted in a conference room with a lofty,
panoramic view of the San Francisco skyline. It was a clear day, and the
Transamerica building, Telegraph Hill, San Francisco Bay, and Alcatraz
stretched out in front of us in one straight visual line. The incredible view
prompted me to describe some of the palatial homes that had served as
the settings for interviews in my previous two Market Wizard books.
Galante joked that we should have done the interview at her home.
"Then," she said, "you could have described the view of the jungle gym in
my backyard."
Note: For reasons that will be apparent, pseudonyms have been used for
all individuals and companies mentioned in this interview.
When did you first become aware of the stock market?
My father was a market maker in the over-the-counter market. When
I was in high school, I worked with him on the trading desk during
summer vacations and school breaks.
What did you do for him?
In those days, although we had terminals, we didn't have computers.
Everything was done by hand. I posted his trades while he was trading.
Did you find yourself trying to anticipate market direction?
I don't really remember, but I was never really obsessed with the mar-
ket, like a lot of the people that you have written about. 1 like the mar-
ket, and I think it's exciting and challenging, but I don't go home and
think about it.
What was your first job out of college?
I worked for Kingston Capital, a large institutional money manage-


--- PAGE 47 ---
ment firm. 1 started out doing back office and administrative work.
Eventually, I was promoted to the role of trader, and I did all the trad-
ing for the office, which managed one billion dollars.
By trader, I assume you mean being responsible for order entry
as opposed to having any decision-making responsibility?
That's right, I just put in the orders.
What was the next step in your career progression?
In 1985, Kingston was taken over in a merger. The acquiring firm
changed everyone's job description. They told me 1 couldn't do the
trading anymore because it all had to be done out of New York. They
wanted me to move into an administrative role, which would have
been a step back for me.
Henry Skiff, the former manager of the Kingston branch office,
went through an analogous experience. He was shifted to a structured
job that he couldn't stand. He and another employee left Kingston
after the merger to form their own institutional money management
firm. Henry offered me a job as a trader and researcher. Although
Henry was a difficult person to work for, I liked the other person, and
I didn't want to go back to an administrative position.
I left with Henry and helped him start the office for his new firm.
I did research and trading for him for two years. Although it was a
good experience, I realized my future was limited, since Henry was
not willing to give up much control over the portfolio. Around the
time I decided that I had to leave, my husband got a good job offer in
another city, and we decided to move. I found a job at Atacama
Investment, which at the time was an institutional money manage-
ment firm. I started out as a portfolio manager, comanaging their
small cap fund [a fund that invests in companies with small capital-
ization], which had a couple of billion dollars in assets.
Had you had any experience before?
Not picking stocks.
Then how did you get a job as a portfolio manager?
I originally started out interviewing for a trading job. But the woman
who had been managing the portfolio, Jane, was on maternity leave.
She only had about six months' experience herself, and they needed
someone to fill the slot. Mark Hannigan, who ran Atacama, believed
I G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
that anyone could do that job. He called us "monkeys." He would tell
us, "I could get any monkey to sit in that chair and do what you do." He
also used to tell me that I think too much, which really annoyed me.
Mark's philosophy was that if a stock's price was going up on the
chart, earnings were growing by 25 percent or more, and if a broker-
age house was recommending it, you would buy it. There was mini-
mal fundamental analysis and no consideration of the quality of
earnings or management. This is the origin of why I ended up trading
on the short side of the market.
Did being a woman help you get the job because you were
replacing another woman?
No, I probably got the job because they could pay me a lot less.
How little did they pay you?
My starting salary was twenty-five thousand dollars a year.
What happened to Jane?
After two months, she returned from maternity leave, and we worked
together. She was a perennial bull. Everything was great. She was
always ready to buy any stock. I was the only one who ever thought
we should wait a minute before buying a stock or suggested getting
out of a stock we owned before it blew up.
Were you and Jane working as coequals, or was she your boss
because she was there before?
We were comanagers. I actually had more experience than she did,
but she joined the company six months earlier. We worked as a team.
Either one of us could put a stock in the portfolio.
Was it a problem having to comanage money with another person?
Not really, since neither one of us had much experience. I would pick
a stock and say, "Look at this," and Jane would say, "Yeah, that looks
good; let's buy 100,000." The real problem was the trading desk.
Once we gave them a buy order, we had no control over the position.
The trade could be filled several points higher, or days later, and there
was nothing we could do about it.
Do you mean that literally? How could there be such a long
delay in a trade being filled?
Because the trader for the company was front-running orders [placing
orders in his own account in front of much larger client or firm orders


--- PAGE 48 ---
to personally profit from the market impact of the larger order he was
about the place]. If a stock we wanted to buy traded 100,000 shares
that day and we didn't get one share, he would say, "Sorry, but I tried."
Since I was a trader, I knew enough to check time-and-sales [an elec-
tronic log of all trades and the exact time they were executed]. If you
questioned him, however, he would just rip you in front of everybody.
(We all worked in one large room.)
Rip you in what way?
He would scream at me, "You don't know anything about fucking
trading. Just go back and sit at your desk."
Did you realize he was crooked back then, or did you just find
out later?
He was the highest-paid person there. He was probably making sev-
eral hundred thousand dollars a year. But he lived well beyond even
his salary. He had a huge house, and he was always taking limousines
everywhere. Everyone suspected that something was going on. It
turns out that there was; it all came out years later when the SEC
investigated and barred him from the industry.
It's rather ironic that as a trader who was merely responsible for
entering orders, he was making ten times what you were making
as the portfolio manager. I assume this is fairly unusual.
Yes it is. Normally, the traders always make much less.
When did you get your first inclination to start shorting stocks?
I sat close to Jim Levitt, who ran Atacama's hedge fund. I was very
interested in what he was doing because of his success in running
the fund.
Was Jim a mentor for you on the short side?
Yes he was, because he had a knack for seeing reality through the
Wall Street hype. I jokingly blame him for my decision to go on the
short side of the business. When things are going badly, I'll call him
up and tell him it's all his fault.
What appealed to you about the short side vis-a-vis the long side?
I felt the short side was more of a challenge. You really had to know
what you were doing. Here I was, just a peon going up against all
these analysts who were recommending the stock and all the man-
agers who were buying it. When I was right, it was a great feeling. I
A G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
felt as if I had really earned the money, instead of just blindly buying
a stock because it was going up. It was a bit like being a detective and
discovering something no one else had found out.
When did you start shorting stocks?
In 1990 after Jim Levitt left Atacama to form his own fund because
he was frustrated by the firm's restrictions in running a hedge fund.
What restrictions?
The environment wasn't very conducive to running a hedge fund. One
of the rules was that you couldn't short any stock that the company
owned. Since the firm held at least a thousand different stocks at any
time, the universe of potential shorts was drastically limited. They also
had a very negative attitude toward the idea of shorting any stocks.
When Jim Levitt quit, I was on vacation in Lake Tahoe. Mark
called me and told me that I would be taking over the hedge fund
because Jim had left the firm. Mark's philosophy was that anyone
could short stocks. He ran computer screens ranking stocks based on
relative strength [price change in the stock relative to the broad mar-
ket index] and earnings growth. He would then buy the stocks at the
top of the list and sell the stocks at the bottom of the list. The prob-
lem was that by the time stocks were at the bottom of his list, they
were usually strong value candidates. Essentially you ended up long
growth stocks and short value stocks—that approach doesn't work too
often. But he had never been a hedge fund manager, and he thought
that was the way you do it.
Did you use his methodology?
No, I really didn't.
How were you picking your shorts then?
I looked for companies that I anticipated would have decreases in
earnings, instead of shorting stocks that had already witnessed
decreases in earnings.
How did you anticipate when a company was going to have
decreased earnings?
A lot of it was top down. For example, the year I took over the hedge
fund, oil prices had skyrocketed because of the Gulf War. It was a
simple call to anticipate that the economy and cyclical stocks would
weaken.


--- PAGE 49 ---
DAHA 6 A L A N T E
Why did you leave Atacama?
In 1993 Atacama transformed their business from an institutional
money management firm to a mutual fund company. Also, both my
husband and I wanted to move back to San Francisco. I spoke to a
number of hedge funds in the area, but none of them were interested
in giving up control of part of their portfolio to me, and I didn't want
to go back to working as just an analyst after having been a portfolio
manager.
With some reluctance, I had dinner with Henry Skiff. It was the
first time I had seen him in five years. He said all the right things. He
assured me that he had changed, and he agreed with everything I
said. He had formed a small partnership with about one million dol-
lars. He told me I could grow it into a hedge fund, run it any way I
wanted, and get a percent of the fees.
What, exactly, was it about Henry that you didn't like when you
had worked with him five years earlier?
I didn't have a whole lot of respect lor him as a portfolio manager.
I'll tell you one story that is a perfect example. During the time I
worked for him, junk bonds had become very popular. Henry had a
friend at a brokerage firm who offered to give him a large account if he
could manage a junk bond portfolio. We had no clue. Henry gave us
all a book about junk bonds and told us to read it over the weekend.
The following Monday we began trading junk bonds; Henry was the
manager, and I was the trader. The book had said that the default rate
was 1 percent, which turned out to be completely bogus. The whole
thing ended up blowing up and going away. Also, although I didn't find
out about it until years later, Henry had embellished his academic
credentials in the firm's marketing documents, falsely claiming under-
graduate and Ph.D. degrees from prestigious universities.
Anyway, Henry convinced me that rejoining him was a great
opportunity. He offered to give me a large raise over what I had been
making. He even offered to pay for my move. I figured the job would
give me a way to move back to San Francisco and that if it didn't work
out I could always find another job. Henry had a great marketing guy,
and we grew the fund to $90 million. But Henry hadn't changed; he
second-guessed everything 1 did.
A G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
Henry would see a stock go up five dollars and get all excited and
say, "Hey Dana, why don't you buy XYZ." He wouldn't even have any
idea what the company did. I would buy the stock because he
wanted me to. The next day the order would be on the trade blotter,
and he would ask me, "Hey, Dana, what is this XYZ stock?" That
was another experience that turned me off to the long side of
stocks.
There was tremendous turnover at the firm because Henry treated
his staff so poorly. We had a meeting every morning where the man-
agers talked about the stocks in their portfolio. Henry would just rip
the managers apart. One of his employees, a man in his fifties, com-
mitted suicide. Henry would tear the confidence out of people, and
this poor guy just didn't have it in him to take it. I had worked with
him for a while, and he was a broken man. I can't say he killed himself
because of the job, but I wouldn't be surprised if it was a factor.
Was Henry critical with you as well?
He was constantly second-guessing me and arguing with me every
time I put on a trade he didn't agree with.
Then how much independence did you have?
I had independence as long as I was doing well, but every time the
market rallied, he wanted me to cover all my shorts. We fought a lot
because I didn't give in. One thing I did is that if Henry insisted I buy
a stock, I would buy it, but then immediately short another stock
against it. That way I would negate any effect he was trying to have on
the portfolio. I did well, but after two years, I couldn't take it anymore
and quit.
Did you start your own firm after you left Henry the second time?
No. After I quit, I was hired by Peter Boyd, who had a hedge fund
that had reached $200 million at its peak. He told me that he'd heard
. a lot of good things about me and was going to give me a portion of his
fund to manage. He said that I could run it any way I wanted. I told
him that I thought I could add the most value by trading strictly on
the short side because that was something he didn't do. Fie started
me out with $10 million and gave me complete discretion. It was
great for me because it was like having my own business without any
of the administrative headaches.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Everything was fine for the first two years, but in the third year,
the fund started to experience very large redemptions because of poor
performance. Boyd had to take the money from me because his own
portfolio wasn't very liquid. He had lost the money by buying huge
OEX put positions, which expired worthless only days later. [He
bought options that would make large profits if the market went down
sharply but would expire as worthless otherwise.]
It almost sounds as if he was gambling with the portfolio.
It sure appeared to be gambling. Looking back, it seemed that he
tried to hide these losses by marking up the prices on privately held
stock in his portfolio. He had complete discretion on pricing these
positions.
How was he able to value these positions wherever he wanted to?
Because they were privately held companies; there was no publicly
traded stock.
Is it legal to price privately held stocks with such broad discre-
tion:1
Yes. In respect to private companies, the general partner is given that
discretion in the hedge fund disclosure document. The auditors also
bought off on these numbers every year. He would tell them what he
thought these companies were worth and why, and they would accept
his valuations. They were these twenty-two-year-old auditors just out
of college, and he was the hedge fund manager making $20 million a
year; they weren't about to question him.
Another hedge fund manager I interviewed who also does a lot of
short selling said that the value of audits on a scale of 0 to 100
was zero. Do you agree?
Yes.
Even if it's a leading accounting firm?
Oh yeah.
How could hedge fund investors be aware whether a manager
was mispricing stocks in the portfolio?
The quarterly performance statements are required to show what per-
cent of the portfolio consists of privately held deals. His performance
was so good for so long that people didn't question it.
A G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
What percent of his portfolio consisted of private deals?
In the beginning it was about 10 percent, but as he lost more and
more money, the portion of the portfolio in privately held companies
continued to grow. By the end, privately held stocks accounted for a
major portion of the portfolio, and he was largely left with a bunch of
nearly worthless paper.
It sounds as if he was gambling in the options market and hiding
his losses by marking up his private deals. Wouldn't the truth
come out when investors redeemed their money and received
back much less than the reported net asset value?
Although I'm not sure, I believe the first investors to redeem received
the full amount, but as more investors redeemed their funds, the true
magnitude of the losses became apparent.
Did you know what he was doing at the time?
I knew about the option losses, but no one knew about the private
deals. They were off the balance sheet.
It sounds as if you worked with quite a host of characters. You
didn't do too well picking your bosses.
Yes, I know. You think that wouldn't be a good sign, but . . .
How did you start your own firm?
I had one account that I had met through Peter. He hired me to run a
short-only portfolio. That was the account I took with me to get
started.
What year was this?
1997.
Your track record shows your performance back to 1994.
To generate the early years of my track record, I extracted the short
trades for the period until I started trading the short-only portfolio.
Do you use charts at all?
I use them for market timing. I think that is one of the things that has
saved me over the years. If, for example, the stock I am short col-
lapses to support, I will probably get out.
How do you to define support"}
Price areas that have witnessed a lot of buying in the past—points at
which prices consolidated before moving higher. Some dedicated


--- PAGE 51 ---
D A N A 
G A L A N T E
shorts will still hold on to their positions, but I will usually cover. I'll
figure the market has already gone down 50 percent. Maybe it will go
down another 10 or 20 percent, but that is not my game. I look for
stocks that are high relative to their value.
That is an example of how you use charts for profit taking. Do
you also use charts to limit losses?
When a chart breaks out to a new high, unless I have some really
compelling information, I just get out ot the way.
How long a period do you look back to determine new highs? If a
stock makes a one-year high but is still below its two-year high,
do you get out?
No, I am only concerned about stocks making new all-time highs.
Have you always avoided being short a stock that made new
highs, or have you been caught sometimes?
No, I have been caught sometimes.
Can you give me an example.
One stock I was short this year, Sanchez Computer Associates, went
from $32 to $80 in one day.
In one day?
It's a company that makes back-office and transaction processing
software for banks. Most of their clients are in underdeveloped coun-
tries and don't have their own systems. The business was slowing
down, and the Street cut its annual earnings estimate from 75 cents
a share to 50 cents. The stock was still trading at $25 at the time,
and as a short, that news sounded great to me. I thought the stock
would go a lot lower. Shortly afterward, the company announced that
they would start an on-line banking software service. This was at a
time when the on-line banking stocks were going ballistic.
What was the previous high in the stock?
It was in the low thirties. The stock just blew way past it.
Were you still bearish the stock when it went to 80?
Yeah, nothing had changed.
How do you handle that type of situation from a money manage-
ment standpoint?
I had never been in that type of situation before—not even remotely.
Our portfolio is relatively diversified. The most I had ever lost on a
a G A I N S T T H E CUtl
single stock in one day was one-half of one percent. That day, I lost 4
percent on the stock.
What portion of your portfolio was the stock?
Before it went up, about 2.5 percent. That is a fairly large position for
me, but I had a lot of conviction on the trade.
Did you try to cover part of your position on the day the stock
skyrocketed?
The stock was up almost $10 right from the opening. I started scram-
bling around, trying to figure out what was going on. Then it was up
$20. Then $30. I tried to cover some of my shorts, but I only wound
up getting filled on about one thousand shares out of a total of forty
thousand that I held.
At the end of the day, you were still short thirty-nine thousand
out of forty thousand shares, the stock had already exploded
from 30 to 80, and you were still bearish on the fundamentals.
What do you do in that type of situation? Do you decide to just
hold the position because the price is so overdone, or do you
cover strictly because of money management reasons?
This was a unique situation. I never had a stock move against me like
that. I've also never been short an Internet stock. Initially, being the
realist that I am, I just tried to get the facts. I checked out all the
companies that did Internet banking to see what kind of software
they used, and Sanchez's name was never mentioned.
The next day the stock dropped $15.1 thought the stock would go
up again, because typically these types of situations last more than
one day. I covered enough of my position to bring it down to 2.5 per-
cent of my portfolio. Because of the price rise, it had gone up to 7
percent of my portfolio, and I can't allow that. Then the stock went
down some more. By the time it went back down to 50, I had reduced
my short position to five thousand shares.
What was your emotional response to this entire experience?
I was almost in shock because I felt a complete lack of control. I had
never experienced anything like it before. Most people are afraid to
go short because they think the risk is unlimited. That never both-
ered me. I consider myself pretty disciplined. I always thought that I
had a good handle on the risk and that I could get out of any short


--- PAGE 52 ---
before it caused too much damage, which up to that point I had. But
here, the stock nearly tripled in one day, and I didn't know what to
do. I was numb.
I was struck by a horrifying thought: Could the same thing happen
to any of the other stocks in my portfolio? I began worrying about
which of my shorts would be the next company to announce an on-
line Web page. I started combing my portfolio, looking for any stock
that might become the next Sanchez.
What eventually happened to the stock?
It went back up again. But when Sanchez started to look like it was
ready to roll over, I rebuilt my short position. Ironically, when it sub-
sequently broke, I made more money on my new short position than I
had lost being short when the stock exploded several months earlier.
How large is your organization?
There are just two of us. Zack works with me and is an integral part
of Miramar. There is a lot of money out there, and interested
investors call me almost every day. I tell them that I am closed to new
investment.
Is that because your methodology can't accommodate any more
money?
I don't want to grow. I don't want to manage people; I want to manage
the portfolio.
Could you grow your size by just taking larger positions instead
of expanding the number of shorts?
I have only run shorts in a bull market. It's a constant battle. I have to
find the best way to fight the battle with the lowest amount of risk. I
need to know that I can cover my short positions if I have to. The
larger my short position, the more difficult that would be. I've seen
what happens to people who grow too fast, and I have taken the oppo-
site extreme. I want to be comfortable doing what I do. I don't want to
be scouring for new shorts because I am managing more money. I
have my family, and when I go home, I don't think about work. I don't
read Barren's over the weekend.
I suppose to some extent your attitude reflects a difference
between male and female perspectives. Maybe, as a generaliza-
A G A I N S T T H E C U R
tion, men want to become empire builders, whereas women
don't.
That's probably it.
How do you select the stocks you short?
I look for growth companies that are overvalued—stocks with high
P/E [price/earnings] ratios—but that by itself is not enough. There
also has to be a catalyst.
Give me an example of a catalyst.
An expectation that the company is going to experience a deteriora-
tion in earnings.
How do you anticipate a deterioration in earnings?
One thing I look for is companies with slowing revenue growth who
have kept their earnings looking good by cutting expenses. Usually, it's
only a matter of time before their earnings growth slows as well.
Another thing I look for is a company that is doing great but has a
competitor creeping up that no one is paying attention to. The key is
anticipating what is going to affect future earnings relative to market
expectations.
In essence, you look for a high P/E stock that has a catalyst that
will make the stock go down.
Right, but there is another key condition: I won't short a stock that is
moving straight up. The stock has to show signs of weakening or at
least stalling.
Can you give me an example of a typical short?
Network Associates has been a stock that I have been short on and off
for the past two years. The company was masking higher operating
expenses by taking huge research and development charges related to
acquisition each quarter. They were taking other expenses as one-
time charges as well. The SEC eventually made them change their
accounting procedures to take these expenses over time as opposed to
one-time charges. After the SEC stepped in, the chairman came out
and said something like, "It's just an accounting issue. We don't pay
much attention to accounting." He also made statements berating the
shorts, saying they would get buried.
When a company blames the price decline in its stock on short


--- PAGE 53 ---
G A L A N Tl:
sellers, it's a red flag. A company's best revenge against short sellers is
simply reporting good numbers. Decent companies won't spend time
focusing on short sellers. "Our stock was down because of short sell-
ing." Give me a break. We represent maybe one billion dollars versus
nine trillion on the long side.
What was Network Associates' product or service?
Their primary product was an antivirus software, a low-margin item
whose price had been coming down over time. They also bought out a
number of companies that were making similar products, usually pay-
ing a large premium. The companies they were buying were stocks
that I was short. I was upset because once they bought out these
companies, I couldn't be short them anymore. At one point, they were
virtually giving away their antivirus product. All you had to do was
look at the Comp USA ads. After adjusting for all the rebates, they
were selling their software for only about five dollars. That told you
that their product wasn't moving.
If they were so desperate in their pricing, didn't their sales show
a sharp drop-off?
No, because they were stuffing the channels.
What does that mean?
They were shipping all their inventory to distributors, even though the
demand wasn't there.
Why would a company do that if they know the product is just
going to get shipped back?
To make the revenues look better. Once they shipped the product,
they can book it as sales.
But they can't keep that up forever.
They did it anyway. But it did come back to haunt them; eventually,
the stock collapsed.
You mentioned that it's a red flag when a company blames shorts
for the decline in its stock. What are some other red flags?
A company that goes from its traditional business to whatever is hot
at the time. For example, during the gambling stock craze, there were
companies that went from having pizza restaurants to riverboat gam-
bling. Right now, the same thing is going on with the Internet. One
A G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
company we shorted recently went from selling flat panel displays to
offering an Internet fax service, trashing their whole business plan in
the process.
Other red flags?
Lots of management changes, particularly a high turnover in the
firm's chief financial officer. Also, a change in auditors, can be a major
red flag.
Can you give me an example?
One of my shorts was Pegasystems, which was a software company
that caught my attention because of high receivables [large outstand-
ing billings for goods and services]. The company was licensing its
software for a monthly fee, typically in five-year contracts, and recog-
nizing the entire discounted value of the contract immediately.
Is this a valid accounting procedure?
It was certainly contrary to the industry practice. Apparently, the orig-
inal accountants didn't go along with the figures, because the com-
pany fired them and hired a new accounting firm. They said they were
making the change because their previous accounting firm didn't
understand the business and wasn't aggressive enough. But the
incredible thing is that people ignored that red flag.
You mean the stock still went up even after they fired their
auditors?
Yes.
When did you get short?
After they fired their auditors.
Any other examples of questionable accounting?
I've had a few shorts that turned into frauds. One example was a
company that ran a vocational school that purportedly taught people
computer skills. They were getting funding from the government, but
they were providing very poor quality education. I became aware of
this stock as well because of high receivables.
What are receivables for a training company?
Tuition fees. The students weren't paying the tuition they owed.
That's what first drew my attention to the stock. Then I learned the
company was being investigated by the Department of Education in


--- PAGE 54 ---
D A N A 
G A L A N T E
response to student complaints that they were using old software and
that the instructors were inept. I shorted the stock in the forties, and
got out near 10. The stock eventually went down to 1.
It sounds as if high receivables is a major indicator for you.
Yes, it's one of the screens we look at.
What are some of the other screens?
We also screen for revenue deceleration, earnings deceleration, high
P/Es, high inventories, and some technical indicators, such as stocks
breaking below their fifty-day moving average.
Do you screen for these factors individually, or do you screen for
multiple characteristics?
Usually multiple characteristics, but you can't screen for all these fac-
tors at one time, or else you won't get any stock that fits all the search
requirements.
Although you have done fine as a 100 percent short seller, have
you had any second thoughts about your choice since we have
been in such a relentless bull market?
No, I find short selling more rewarding because of the challenge.
You make a lot of money in this business, and I think you need to
work for what you get. To just sit there and buy Internet stocks every
day doesn't seem right. I can't relate to it. In fact, I wonder how I
will do if we ever do get into a bear market because I am so used to
a bull market, watching people ignore bad news and taking advan-
tage of that.
But I would imagine that in a bear market, your job would be
much easier.
In August 1998 when the market went down fast and hard, I was
more stressed out than I am normally.
But you did very well during that period.
I did great, but I thought it was too easy. I wasn't fighting a battle. I
felt as though I didn't have to work. Any stock I went short would go
down. It was a weird feeling. That's what people do all the time on the
long side; they just buy stocks, and they tend to go up.
And you didn't like that?
No, it was very uncomfortable. Maybe I am a little sick; I don't know
what's wrong with me.
A G A I N S T T H E C U R R E N T
When a market suddenly breaks a lot, as it did then, do you
reduce your short exposure?
I did in that instance because it happened so quickly. I made 30 per-
cent in one month. That has never happened to me before. I covered
about 40 percent of the portfolio.
What kind of risk control strategies do you use?
If I lose 20 percent on a single stock, I will cover one-third of my posi-
tion. I limit the allocation to any single stock to a maximum of about
3 percent of the portfolio. If a stock increases to a larger percentage of
the portfolio because of a price rise, I will tend to reduce the position.
I also control risk through diversification: There are typically fifty to
sixty names in the portfolio spread across different industry sectors.
Do you know other short sellers?
Yes. With the exception of a couple of short sellers that have become
my friends, most short sellers tend to be very pessimistic on the world
and life. They tend to be very negative people.
But you're not?
I don't think I am. I think I am just a realist. One thing that differen-
tiates me from other short sellers is my experience on the long side.
Why is that important?
Because it's all about why people buy and sell. My experience in
working with momentum-type managers gives me a sense of their
thought processes, which helps me know when to get out of the way
and when to press my bets. I have some friends who are short sellers
that have never worked on the long side. They would call me up and
ask, "Dana, why are they buying this stock? It has negative cash flow,
high receivables, etcetera." They look at the raw numbers, and they
are realists. They don't understand that a lot of people just buy the
stock because it's going up or because the chart looks good. We've
gone to the stratosphere now. Most of the people I know who were
short sellers have been blown away. They don't even ask me those
questions anymore.
What advice could you give to the ordinary investor who trades
only on the long side?
A good company could be a bad stock and vice versa. For example,
Disney is a good company—or at least my kids love it. But during the


--- PAGE 55 ---
D A N A G A L A N T E
past few years we were able to make money on the short side because
the company had become very overpriced on overly optimistic expec-
tations that its business would grow robustly forever.
Although Galante is a 100 percent short seller, her ideas are still
relevant to the long-only investor. Galante's methodology can be very
useful as a guideline for which stocks to avoid or liquidate. The com-
bination of factors Galante cites include:
K very high P/E ratio
*• a catalyst that will make the stock vulnerable over the near term
^ an uptrend that has stalled or reversed
All three of these conditions must be met. Investors might con-
sider periodically reviewing their portfolios and replacing any stocks
that meet all three of the above conditions with other stocks. By
doing so, investors could reduce the risk in their portfolios.
In addition, Galante cites a number of red flags that attract her
attention to stocks as potential short candidates. By implication, any
of these conditions would be a good reason for investors who own
the stock to seriously consider liquidating their position. These red
flags include:
^ high receivables
^ change in accountants
!>• high turnover in chief financial officers
*• a company blaming short sellers for their stock's decline
*• a company completely changing their core business to take
advantage of a prevailing hot trend
MARK D. COOK
Harvesting S&P Profits'
Mark D. Cook drives his pickup truck off the road, up the hill overlooking
his father's farm on the outskirts of East Sparta, Ohio. The weather is
unseasonably warm and feels very much like a day in late spring, but it is
still late winter. The rolling fields stretch out before us in various shades
of brown. "I wanted you to see this," Cook says. "When it greens up in
spring, there is no more beautiful sight in the world."
I paint the scene in my mind and visualize easily enough how it could
appear quite pleasant with the renewal of spring. But to see this land-
scape with the sense of majesty implied by Cook's voice, you have to look
at it through the eyes of someone who has worked the land and sees it as
a provider of sustenance and a link between generations.
"When my dad bought this farm nearly sixty years ago," Cook says,
"the land was so poor you couldn't grow ragweed a foot tall on it. When-
ever my trading is going badly and I feel stressed out, I come up here.
When I look out at all that has been accomplished through hard work,
despite the difficulties that were encountered, it gives me a sense of
serenity." Cook is passionate about trading, but his love for his market
career still comes in third place after family and the land.
The first time I saw Mark D. Cook he was a fellow speaker at an
industry conference, and he made an impression before he uttered a sin-
gle word. He came up to the podium dressed in bib overalls. He did this
to make a point about his roots, but his choice of dress was not merely
*This chapter contains some references to options. Readers completely unfamiliar with
options may find it helpful (although not essential) to first read the four-page primer
in the appendix.
95


--- PAGE 56 ---
M A R K D. COOK!
show, there was also substance to it. Even though he has made millions
trading, Cook continues to do some farmwork himself. It is difficult to
justify his manual labor in any economic sense. Cook rationalizes his
part-time farmwork, which is in addition to the fifty to sixty hours per
week he puts in as a trader, by saying that he is a workaholic. This is true
enough, but I also believe that Cook would feel a tinge of guilt if he
worked "only" as a trader while his eighty-one-year-old father continued
to farm full-time.
Cook had brought me to his father's farm as part of a tour of the local
area. As we drove along, Cook pointed out various tracts of land, which
he identified by a year number. "There's 1997," he said, referring to the
farm he had bought with his 1997 trading profits. "There's 1995," he said
a few moments later, and so on. He apparently has had a lot of good
years. Cook is almost zealous about converting his trading profits into
real assets—and for Cook farmland is the ultimate real asset.
The highlight of the tour was linked to another outlet for Cook's trad-
ing profits: rare farm tractors. Cook shares his father's enthusiasm for
collecting antique tractors, a mutual hobby that led to the creation of the
Cook Tractor Museum. You won't find this museum, which is situated
next to Cook's farmhouse trading office, in any guidebook. The museum's
exhibits are displayed in a large metal shed structure that was built in
1996 to house the burgeoning rare tractor collection.
Cook picked up his father, Marvin, so that he could accompany us on
the museum visit. Marvin Cook, who is the epitome of the taciturn
farmer, turned into Mr. Tour Guide as soon as we entered the metal
shed. He described the unique characteristics of each tractor model on
display and the history of its manufacturer, who in most instances had
disappeared from the American scene long ago. The museum contains
some real rarities, including two of only five American tractors (only one
other is known to still exist), built by an Ohio company that went out of
business before the line went into full production.
Cook next took me to the farm he had bought with his 1994 trading
profits. Cook currently leases the land for coal mining, and we hiked
across the rolling fields and scrambled down a scree-strewn slope to view
the open-pit mining operation. Buying this land gave Cook particular sat-
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
isfaction because it was the alternative property his great-grandfather
had considered purchasing before settling on the original family farm-
stead in 1890.
I had begun my interview with Cook the previous evening at Tozzi's,
an eighty-five-year-old, family-owned establishment that is the best
restaurant in Magnolia, Ohio. It is also the only restaurant in Magnolia
(population: 1,000). The lack of competition, however, apparently hasn't
had any adverse influence; the food was very good and the service atten-
tive. After the two-hour dinner. Cook was only getting warmed up in
talking about his career. We continued the interview at Cook's 125-year-
old farmhouse office, a dark walnut-paneled room, unadorned except
for a cow painting (Cook's wife, Terri, was the artist). At around 1 A.M.,
we were still not finished. Knowing that Cook wanted to get an early
start the next morning, I decided to leave the remainder for the next
day. We continued the interview the next morning at breakfast and fin-
ished it later that day in the airport parking lot, seated in Cook's pickup
truck.
Cook's early attempts at trading were marked by repeated setbacks,
experiences he relates in the interview. Cook, however, never gave up.
Each failure only made him work harder. Finally, after many years of
carefully tracking the stock market, filling volumes of market diaries, and
assiduously recording and analyzing every trade he made, his trading
became consistently profitable.
Once Cook became confident in his trading abilities, he entered
several market contests, registering an 89 percent gain in a four-month
competition in 1989, and 563 percent and 322 percent returns in back-
to-back annual contests beginning in 1992. His annual returns in the six
years since then have ranged between 30 percent and a stratospheric
1,422 percent. These statistics are based on defining percent return as
annual dollar profits divided by beginning year equity, a conservative def-
inition that understates Cook's true performance, because he frequently
withdraws profits from his account but never adds funds. For example, in
his low-return year (based on our definition of percent return), his with-
drawals during the year exceeded his starting capital. Cook provided me
with his account statements for his most recent four years. During this


--- PAGE 57 ---
M A R K D. 
C O O K J
period, he was profitable on 87 percent of all trading days, with one-third
of the months showing only winning days.
How does a farm boy end up trading the S&P?
I started trading because of a cow.
You'll have to explain that one to me.
In 1975, while attending Ohio State University as an agricultural busi-
ness major, I was on the national cattle judging team for Ohio. That
experience helped me get a summer job as one of the two cowboys
that took Elsie the Cow around the country as publicity for Borden.
Was this like Lassie? When Elsie died, did they replace her with
another Elsie?
They changed Elsies after the tour was over, which lasted about thir-
teen weeks.
Where did you go on this tour?
All over. We even received the key to the city from Mayor Daley in
Chicago because the city's mascot was a cow. I was also interviewed
on several TV and radio shows.
What kind of questions would they ask you about a cow?
Oh, how much milk did she produce? What kind of cow was she?
How much crap did she produce in a day? How old was she? What
did she eat? Does she kick? How come she doesn't have any flies?
Whenever I got that last question, I said, "We give her a bath every
day; she's cleaner than you are."
One night we were on a radio show in Chicago. The host was
Eddie Schwartz who had an all-night talk program back in the 1970s
before talk programs became big. We were on for hours. At about 3
A.M. he asked us, "Hey, what would you guys like to do now?"
"We've been on the road constantly," I answered. "We haven't gone
out with any women for a while."
"No problem," he said. "What kind of girls would you like?" he
asked us.
I was a bit of a ham, so I said, "The first two girls who get down
here in bikinis, we'll show them a night on the town."
"Girls out there," he announced, "did you hear that?"
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
"I wasn't serious," I quickly added.
"No problem," he said. "You heard them out there," he told his
audience. It wasn't fifteen minutes before two girls wearing bikinis
showed up at the studio.
Before we left, he said to us, "I get a lot of obnoxious calls. I'd love
to get a tape of your cow mooing so that I could turn it on whenever I
have an annoying caller." We always kept Elsie on a local farm when
we traveled. We arranged to meet Eddie at the farm the next morning.
Wait, wait, not so fast. What happened to the bikini girls?
Nothing happened, because my wife may read this [he laughs].
The next morning when Schwartz arrived at the farm, he said,
"Are you sure you can get her to moo, Mark?"
"Oh sure, I can get her to do anything." 1 tied her up to a wagon
and placed the tape recorder inside.
"She isn't mooing," he said.
"No problem," I said. "Just move everybody out of the way. I'll
calm her down, and as soon as I walk away, she'll start crying. She'll
cry because she is a celebrity, and celebrities need attention."
"You're just pulling my leg," he said.
"No, I'm serious," I said, "just watch." I walked away, and it wasn't
long before Elsie started bellowing at the top of her lungs. He used
that tape on Chicago radio for years.
Being Elsie's cowboys also helped us get into the Playboy Club.
One night while I was in Chicago, my boss joined us. I said, "We
should go to the Playboy Club."
"Oh sure, Mark," he said. " How are we going to get in?" You could
only get into the Playboy Club by invitation.
"Don't worry," I told him, "I can get us in."
"And how are you going to do that?" he asked.
"Just wait and you'll see," I told him. When we arrived at the club,
I walked up to the imposing guard at the door and said, "You allow
celebrities in, right?"
"Oh yeah," the man said, "we like celebrities. Who are you?"
"It isn't who I am," I answered, "but whom I represent." I pulled
out my Elsie the Cow identification card. This was just after we had
done the Mayor Daley ceremony.


--- PAGE 58 ---
M A R K D. 
C O O i
"Oh sure," he said skeptically. He no doubt had heard every type
of story by people trying to get in, although this was probably the first
time someone had tried to use his pet cow to gain admittance.
"I have my girlfriend right here with me," I said as I pulled out a
photo of Elsie standing next to me.
"Just a minute," he said as he went behind the padlocked door. He
came back out with a celebrity key and let us in.
This is all very interesting, but what does it have to do with your
becoming a trader?
After graduating college, I wanted to get a job as a stockbroker. I
couldn't get hired. Nothing in my resume seemed to help—not my
grades, nor the fact that I played college basketball. Finally, I rewrote
my resume, prominently mentioning that I had been Elsie's cowboy.
Shortly thereafter, I received a call to interview at a local brokerage
office in Canton, which ultimately led to a job offer. The woman who
screened resumes for the firm later told me, "I get hundreds of
resumes. When I saw yours I said, 'Hey, this is the guy who took care
of Elsie the Cow.'" I had been in Canton when I did the tour, and she
had remembered seeing the picture in the local newspaper. That's
how I got into the business, because of a cow.
Why did you want to become a stockbroker? Were you trading
stocks?
I started trading stocks after I graduated college. By buying and sell-
ing cattle, I was able to build up a $20,000 stake.
Had you done any research? Did you have any methodology?
No, I just plunged right in. I still remember my first two trades: I
bought Columbia and Sambo's. Columbia got bought out; and
Sambo's went bankrupt. Starting out, I experienced the best and the
worst and was hooked.
Do you remember why you bought those two specific stocks?
Yes, a lot of the research went into it. 1 bought Columbia because I
had seen a documentary on the making of Close Encounters of the
Third Kind, which Columbia was going to release, and I thought the
movie was going to be a big hit. Columbia was bought out before
the movie was released, so it didn't end up making any difference.
H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O F I T S
What about Sambo's?
When I went to the Rose Bowl with my fraternity brothers, we went
out to eat at a Sambo's. I had never heard of the chain before and
thought it was neat, so I bought the stock. That's a summary of my
total research. I didn't know anything more about either of the two
companies. Then the stockbroker I was dealing with said, "Mark, you
like action. Why don't you try stock options?"
"I don't know anything about options," I told him. He gave me a
booklet to read. After reading it from cover the cover, I called my bro-
ker and said, "It sounds pretty risky me."
"Oh no, it's just like trading stocks," he said.
In April 1978, I made my first option trade: I bought two Tele-
dyne calls at $9 apiece for a total premium of $1,800. I sold the
options two days later for $13, earning a total profit of $800 on my
$1,800 investment. I said to myself, "Boy, this is a lot easier than
shoveling manure and milking cows." For my next option trade, I
bought Teledyne calls again, and again I made money. I thought I
was going to be a millionaire in no time flat. I was doing so well that
I thought, "Why trade with only a small part of my capital; I might
as well use all of it." I kept trading Teledyne options. Finally, I put
on an option position that went down. I thought I would hold it until
it came back. It went to zero and expired on me. I lost all the money
I had.
The whole $20,000?
That plus the approximate $3,000 I had been ahead before that trade.
I remember filing my income tax for that year. I had made $13,000 in
income and lost $20,000 in stock option trading. The worst thing was
that I was only able to deduct $3,000 of losses against my income. So
I had to pay income tax, even though I had a negative income.
Did you learn anything from that experience?
Yes. I learned that I wanted my money back. I'm not a quitter in any
shape or form. I was determined to learn everything I could about
stocks and options. That was the beginning of my pursuit to become a
stockbroker. The only reason I wanted to become a stockbroker was
to get my money back.


--- PAGE 59 ---
Did your parents know you had lost all your money?
Oh no, they probably thought I had my money in a CD.
Well, you did have your money in a CD.
Pardon?
A call debacle.
That's exactly right. My goal was to make $100,000 a year. By the
time I was hired as a stockbroker in 1979, I had studied options quite
thoroughly. I started trading options again, but I still kept losing
money steadily. I analyzed my trades and found that I was losing
money because I was holding on to options for several weeks or
longer, and they would end up going to zero. 1 realized that the money
I had lost had been made by the traders who sold the options that I
bought. I decided from that point on, I would only sell options. I
adopted a strategy of simultaneously selling both the calls and puts in
high-volatility stocks.
The margin on short-option positions at that time was sometimes
less than the premium I collected from the sale of the options. In 1979
when gold prices exploded, I sold options on gold stocks. I figured out
that I could sell a combination [the simultaneous sale of a call and
put] on ASA for more money than the margin I had to put up for the
trade. At that time, the margin department hadn't figured this out. As a
result, I could put on any size position and not get a margin call. There
was only one slight problem—the stock took off on me. I made a little
bit on the puts, which expired worthless, but lost a lot on the calls,
which went way in the money. It was back to the drawing board again.
How did you have enough money to cover your losses?
Oh, I was a very good broker. I was the second from the top first-year
broker nationwide for the firm. In 1981 I worked out a system for sell-
ing options when their premiums seemed too high and found some-
one to program the rules for me. Every week, the program would spit
out a list of potential trades. Since I was selling options that were well
out-of- the -money, they almost always expired worthless. Every Friday
after the close, I would run the program, and every Monday morning,
I would put on the trades. I was rolling along making several thousand
dollars a month.
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
By May 1982, I had built my account up to $115,000. I reached
greater depths of greed. I thought that I'd perfected this and it was
working great. I stepped up the trading in my account and my family's
accounts. That month I made an additional $50,000 using the same
strategy.
In June 1982, I decided to step up my trading even more. One
week that month I ran my program, and the computer printed out a
list of trades involving Cities Service. The stock was trading at $27 at
the time, and the 35, 40, and 45 call options were selling for premi-
ums far above the model-implied prices, with only about a week left
before expiration. [Options with these strike prices would go to zero
unless the stock price rose above these respective levels in the remain-
ing week before their expiration.] I couldn't believe the prices; I felt as
if they were giving me the money. I sold hundreds of these options. I
still remember that on June 16, 1982—one day before the day that
will live in infamy for me—I tried to sell an additional hundred
options at a specific price right before the close, but I didn't get filled.
The next day, they announced that Cities Service was going to be
bought out for $20 more than my highest strike price option. They
shut down trading in the stock and options for the rest of the week
and didn't resume trading until after the option expiration. Of course,
the options got exercised [leaving Cook short one hundred shares for
each option he had sold], and by the time the stock started trading
again, I was down $500,000.
Did that include your family's accounts?
No, that was just my account. I had gone from $165,000 at the start
of June to a deficit of over $350,000. In addition, I had lost over
$100,000 apiece in accounts I had for my mother, father, and aunt. I
still have the trade slips right here in my desk drawer. It wasn't until
last year—seventeen years after this happened—that I was able to
pull them out and look at them. I had a margin call in excess of one
million dollars on my account, which is what I would have had to put
up if I wanted to hold the short stock position instead of buying it
back. Technically, you are supposed to have five days to meet the mar-
gin call, but the firm was on me to cover the position right away.


--- PAGE 60 ---
M A R K D. C O O K *
That night I called my mother, which was the hardest phone call I
ever had to make. I felt like a complete failure. I felt like I should be
put in shackles and hauled away. "Mom," I said, "I need to talk to you."
"What is it?" she asked.
"I think you need to come over to the house tomorrow morning to
discuss it."
"It'll have to be pretty early," she said, "because I have to get to the
college." [At the time, Cook's mother, Martha, was chairman of the
education department at Malone College in Canton, Ohio, where she
still teaches a course in English grammar.]
"That's okay Mom, the earlier, the better." The next morning,
around 6:30 A.M., I looked out my window and saw my mom dragging
up the walk at a snail's pace, which was very uncharacteristic for her.
She came in and asked, "Mark, what is the problem?"
"Sit down on the couch, Mom," I said solemnly.
She sat down and asked, "What's wrong, Mark? Is it something
serious?"
"Yes, I'm afraid it is," I answered. "Mom, I lost $100,000 of your
money."
She didn't flinch at all. She looked me straight in the eye and
asked sympathetically "How much did you lose, Mark?"
"1 lost half a million dollars," I said.
"But you don't have half a million dollars."
"1 know, Mom."
"What else?" she asked.
"What do you mean, 'what else'?" I asked.
"Besides losing all this money, what else is wrong?"
"That's it, Mom," I answered.
"Oh, is that all! I thought you had cancer."
Did that ever put things in a different light. Her next sentence to
me was unbelievable: "How long will it be until you make it back?"
she asked.
If she would have said anything else, I would have quit. But she
had said just the right thing, at the right time. 1 straightened myself
up a bit and said, "Five years," picking a number out of the air
because I had no clue how I would make the money back.
H A R V E S T I N G S & P PR Oil III
"If you make the money back in ten years, that's okay," she said.
"Now go ahead and do it."
From that point forward, I never again sold any naked options
[option positions that have an open-ended loss if the market goes up
or down sharply].
What eventually happened to Cities Service after the brokerage
firm liquidated your account?
That's the ironic thing. The deal fell through, [f [ had been able to
meet the margin call, within a month, I would have made back all my
money and even had a profit. The takeover offer was made just before
expiration and then retracted afterward. There should have been an
investigation, but there never was. On the positive side, though, if I
had been filled on the last hundred options 1 was trying to sell the day
before the takeover announcement, I would have been forced into
bankruptcy.
How were you able to cover the $350,000 deficit you had in your
account?
My parents gave me $200,000, and 1 borrowed the remaining
$150,000, using my farm as collateral. There is nothing more debili-
tating than borrowing money to put into a brokerage account to bring
it up to zero. I was only twenty-eight years old at the time, and I was
determined to claw my way back. I worked fourlecn-hour days. I
would get up at 5:30 A.M., milk cows until 9 A.M., clean up, go into
the office, and work as a broker until 5:30 P.M. When I came home, I
changed clothes, went out into the barn to do the milking, and then
came back in at 9 P.M. to eat dinner and go to bed. In essence, I was
working two full-time jobs. I kept this routine up for five years until I
sold the dairy operation.
Did you maintain this grueling schedule because you were trying
to make your money back as quickly as possible?
I had to keep the farming operation going because 1 had borrowed
against it. Also, remember that this was 1982, which was the virtual
peak in the interest rate cycle. My monthly interest-rate payment
alone was $8,800. My net worth was probably a negative $200,000. A
number of people advised me to declare bankruptcy, but I wouldn't
do it. When I look back at it now, I realize that declaring bankruptcy


--- PAGE 61 ---
M A R K D. C O O K ;
would probably have been the right business decision. But I wouldn't
be the trader I am today if I had done it, because that would have
been admitting defeat.
Did you also feel that this self-imposed servitude was just pun-
ishment?
1 really did.
How did your wife respond to this whole situation?
She was actually quite supportive. When I started digging myself
out of it, she said, "I've never seen anyone who can make money like
you can when you're backed into a corner." She's right. Even now,
whenever I have a losing month, I just claw like a tiger to make it
back. That's when I work my hardest. When I work fifteen-hour
days, my wife knows that my trading is not going well. Conversely,
when I'm home early, she'll say, "Your trading must really be floating
along."
Most traders that I've talked to about losing periods say they
ease up or even take a break during those times.
I do just the opposite. Whenever I am down, the frequency of my
trading steps up.
But aren't you afraid that you will aggravate your losses by
doing that?
I increase my activity, not my exposure. In fact, the first thing I do
when I'm losing is to stop the bleeding. That's why I have this sign on
my computer. [He points to a sheet that reads GET SMALLER.] I don't
get out of the trade that is hurting me completely; I just reduce the
position size. Then the next trade that I do, I feel compelled to make
money. It doesn't matter how much. The point is to rebuild my confi-
dence. Even if I only make a few hundred dollars on that trade, it
shows that I can still make money. Once I have a winning trade, I'm
ready to go again.
What advice would you give to other traders about handling los-
ing situations?
Hope should never be in your vocabulary. It is the worst four-letter
word I know. As soon as you say, "Boy, I hope this position comes
back," you should reduce your size.
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
What about the flip side—winning streaks—any advice there?
Never increase the size of your positions on a winning streak. Other-
wise you guarantee that you will have your largest position on a losing
trade.
How long was it until you started trading again after the Cities
Service disaster?
Almost two years. The first trade I put on was in April 1984, right
after the birth of my first daughter.
Were you profitable when you resumed trading?
I was approximately breakeven for 1984 and 1985. My first big prof-
itable year was 1986.
Did something change then?
Yes, I had developed my cumulative tick indicator. In 1986, I began
keeping a daily trading diary. Every day I wrote down recurrent pat-
terns that I noticed in the market. One indicator that appeared to be
useful was what is called the tick, which is the number of New York
Stock Exchange stocks whose last trade was an uptick minus the
number whose last trade was a downtick. When the market is going
up, the tick will be positive, and when it's going down, it will be nega-
tive. I noticed that whenever the tick became very negative, the mar-
ket would tend to snap back on the upside. Conversely, strongly
positive tick readings seemed to be followed by sell-offs.
I asked a broker who had been in the business for thirty years
what it meant when the tick got very positive or negative. He said, "A
negative tick means the stock market is going down, and a positive
tick means it is going up."
"Yeah, I know that," I said, "but what do I do when the tick is very
positive or negative?"
"Well, if it's a high plus, you buy, and if it's a high minus, you sell,"
he answered. I asked a number of other brokers the same question,
and they gave me the same advice.
Since this advice contradicted my observations, I did just the
opposite: When the tick went above plus 400, I would sell, and when
it went below minus 400, I would buy. I recorded the results in my
diary and confirmed that this strategy was making money. I noticed,


--- PAGE 62 ---
D. C O O K
however, that the more minus the tick became, the more the market
would snap back, and the more positive it became, the more the mar-
ket would sell off. That's how I got the idea of keeping a cumulative
count on the tick, which evolved into my cumulative tick indicator. I
have never had this indicator fail, but you need nerves of steel to
trade with it because the market is always in a panic situation—usu-
ally because of an external news event—when the readings get
extreme.
I know your cumulative tick indicator is a proprietary measure,
but what can you tell me about it?
The calculation ignores periods when the tick is in a neutral band,
which I define as a reading between -400 to +400. When the tick is
beyond these thresholds, a reading is recorded at fixed time intervals
and added to a running total. When this total gets below the historical
5th percentile,. it signals an oversold situation [a buying opportunity],
and when it gets above the 95th percentile it signals an overbought
situation [a selling opportunity].
How long did it take you to recover the $350,000 trading deficit
that was left over from the Cities Service trade?
Five years, measured from the Cities Service trade, which was three
years after I resumed trading. The big year was 1987. When I say
that, people automatically assume that I must have been short during
the October crash, but I actually made most of the money during the
bull market earlier that year.
At that time I wasn't day trading yet. In May 1987 I saw what I
believed was a phenomenal buying opportunity in stock index call
options. Two factors had converged: my cumulative tick indicator was
giving extremely bullish readings, and the decline in volatility had
made the option premiums very cheap. My grandfather used to tell
me, "Buy things when people don't want them, and sell things when
people want them." I put $55,000 into long-term, out-of-the-money
stock index calls that were trading at !/2 to 5/s. [In this type of option
position, the trader can make multiples of the initial outlay if there is
a huge price advance, but lose the entire investment in any other
price scenario.] I bought well over a thousand options. During the
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
!
next few months, stock prices exploded and the volatility shot up—a
combination that caused the value of my options to soar.
Ever since the Cities Service disaster in 1982, I had wanted to
demonstrate to my parents that I wasn't a failure. On August 7, 1987,
I went over to see them. I told them, "I'm trading options again."
"Oh no!" exclaimed my dad. "What is the bad news this time?"
"Well, Dad, that is why I'm here," I answered.
"Why do you trade those things, Mark? Didn't you learn your les-
son? Do you have a problem again?"
"Yes, I have an income tax problem," I answered. "The calls I
bought are worth $750,000."
"How much did you invest?" my father asked.
"Fifty-five thousand dollars," I answered.
"Gosh, take it!" he said.
"No," I said, "they are going up more tomorrow." The next day I
cashed out the position for a $1.4 million-dollar profit.
What else do you base your trading decisions on besides the
cumulative tick indicator?
The cumulative tick indicator is an intermediate tool that only sets up
about two to four times a year; the rest of the time, it's in a neutral
reading. I have a variety of different trades I use.
Can you give me an example of some of them.
One trade I do I call a "conjunction trade" because it requires two simul-
taneous conditions for a buy signal: the tick going below -400 and the
tiki, which is a tick indicator based on the thirty Dow Jones stocks, going
below —22.1 give this trade only twenty-one minutes to work. Whenever
I get a signal, I set my egg timer. [He winds up the egg timer on his desk,
which ticks, audibly as it unwinds during the ensuing conversation.} I
picture the egg timer as a bomb, and I have to be out of the position
before it goes off. I will liquidate the position when any of the follow-
ing three things happen: I get my 3-point profit objective, my 6-point
stop-loss is hit, or the twenty-one-minute time limit is running out.
Why twenty-one minutes?
Because of the trading diaries that I keep. I've recorded these trades
time and time and time again. The best trades work the quickest. I


--- PAGE 63 ---
M A R K D.
found that you should make three points within the first ten minutes.
After ten minutes, the trade could still work, but the odds are much
lower. Once you get to fifteen minutes, the odds are so reduced that
all you want to do is get out the best you can. The more time that goes
by, the lower the probability that the objective will be reached.
I note that you are using a risk point that is twice as large as your
objective. That's fairly unorthodox.
It's all a matter of probabilities. I like high-probability trades. This
trade, as many of the other trades I do, works approximately seven out
of eight times on average. If I make 3 points seven times and lose 6
points one time, I still come out ahead 15 points across eight trades.
Another trade I do involves watching the ratio between the S&P
and Nasdaq. I use this information to decide which market I will
trade if I get a signal. If I get a buy signal on one of my other indica-
tors, I will buy the index that is relatively stronger that day. And if I get
a sell signal, I will sell the index that is relatively weaker.
What would be an example of a signal?
I have a trade that I called a "tick buy," which means that if the tick
gets to -1000, I will buy because the market will tend to snap back
after that point.
In other words, if you get a tick buy signal, which implies a
sharply declining market, you'll buy the index—S&P or Nas-
daq—that is less weak.
That's right.
Can you give me any other examples of trades that you do.
One trade I call a "catapult trade" because it's just like a catapult,
which gets bent back until it springs and then the projectile flies over
a threshold. For example, if the S&P is trading back and forth in a
range between 1350 and 1353, and each time it pulls back, it holds a
little higher, then I'll expect it to catapult above the top of the range
by the width of the range, or to 1356. The reason the trade works is
because stops tend to build up right above the catapult point.
Another trade I do is the bond ratio trade. The bonds and S&P are
like a couple. The bond market always leads, so it is the female,
because the male always follows the female. When a couple first start
to date, they don't know each other yet, and they will be a bit out of
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
harmony. On analogous markets days, when the bonds go up, the S&P
may also go up, but it won't follow very tightly. Then they get engaged,
and the relationship becomes closer. Then they get married and go on
a honeymoon. When they are on a honeymoon, everything they do is
synchronous. On "honeymoon days" in the markets, when I see the
bonds go up a few ticks, I know the S&P will immediately follow, and
I will buy the S&P for a quick trade. After the honeymoon, when they
settle into married life, the bonds will drag the S&P husband along,
but they are not quite as joined as they once were. Then the couple
gets estranged, or in market terms, whenever the bonds go up, the
S&P will likely go down. Then comes the bitter divorce. On "divorce
days" the bonds and S&P will move in exactly opposite directions.
Every day, I make a determination of what type of day it is. Today, for
example, the bonds were going up, and the S&P was selling off. The
Street called it a "flight to quality," but to me it was just a "divorce day."
Did you ever manage money, or have you always traded just your
own account?
In 1989, I decided to get into money management. I asked people I
knew in the business what I needed to do as an unknown in the mid-
dle of nowhere to attract investors. One person suggested that I enter
the U.S. Investing Championship [a now defunct real money trading
contest] to attract greater public visibility. That was the first time I
had ever heard of this trading competition. Back in 1989, the contest
was held for four-month intervals. I entered the options division cate-
gory and finished second, making 89 percent for the four months.
That gave me enough confidence to think that I could do this. I
decided to give up my brokerage business and concentrate just on my
own trading.
Why couldn't you continue to do both?
It seemed to me that just about every time I was in a trade and had to
do something quickly, a client would call and want to talk about util-
ity stocks or something equally urgent.
I opened a personal account with a clearing firm in New York that
also did business with other money managers. After my account had
been active for about three or four months, I received a call from
compliance [the company department responsible for making sure


--- PAGE 64 ---
M A R K 0. C O O K
that all accounts are traded in accordance with government and
industry regulations]. My immediate thought was, "Oh no, what's the
problem now?"
"I've been looking at your account," the caller said, "and it appears
that you only trade options."
"That's right," I answered warily.
"It also looks like you only buy options," he said.
"That's right," I answered. "1 don't believe in selling options."
"Why not?" he asked.
"Too much risk," I said.
"I reviewed all your trades since you opened your account with
us," he said.
"Is there a problem?" I asked.
"No, as a matter of fact, I have never seen anybody who can trade
like you do."
"What exactly does that mean?" I asked.
"Well, for starters, you are the shortest-term trader I have ever
seen. In fact, it seems like you never hold a position for more than
three days. Why is that?" he asked.
"That's because after years and years of trading experience, I have
learned that if I hold positions for more than three days, it diminishes
my return. When you buy an option, the premium steadily evaporates
over time. It's like holding an ice cube in your hand: the longer it's
there, the more it diminishes until finally it doesn't exist at all. You are
in the compliance department," I said. "Is there a problem?"
"We have been looking for someone like you for a long time. We
are waiting for you to get a one-year track record before offering you
as a money manager to our clients. I wasn't supposed to contact you
until this point because we thought it probably would change your
trading pattern if you knew you were being watched."
"You don't know me," I said. "That's not going to happen."
"We'll see," he said.
Had he been tracking your account because he was looking for
potential in-house money managers?
Oh no, he started following me from a compliance standpoint to shut
me down. I assume the fact that I was trading only options and turn-
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
ing over my trades very quickly must have sent up all sorts of red
flags.
He continued to monitor my account, and after the account
reached the one-year mark, he called again. "You actually did better
after you knew I was watching you," he said.
"I guess you gave me a bit of incentive," 1 answered.
"I can't sell this, though," he said.
"Why not?" I asked.
"You did too well. No one is going to believe these numbers. But
don't worry, I'm going to raise money for you anyway. I don't have to
show your track record. People will just invest with you based on my
recommendation."
He pulled together a number of small accounts into a single million-
dollar account, which I started trading at the beginning of 1991. If
you recall, that was right at the brink of the United States' launching
an attack on Iraq, and the stock market had been selling off precipi-
tously. The cumulative tick indicator was signaling that the market
was heavily oversold. On January 4, 1 started buying S&P index calls
[an option position that bets on a rising market], I continued to add to
the position over the next few days.
Wait a minute. I thought you held positions only for a maximum
of three days.
That's true for most of my trades. There is one major exception: if my
cumulative tick indicator, which only sets up a few times a year, is still
telling me to buy, then I will hold a position beyond three days. When
the tick indicator sets up, the market sometimes responds immedi-
ately, but I've also seen it take as long as seven weeks. As long as the
indicator is still providing a signal, I will only trade in the same direc-
tion. If it's oversold, I will only buy calls, and if it's overbought, I will
only buy puts. [Puts are option positions that give the buyer the right
to sell the stock or index at the strike price and will therefore make
money in a declining market.] I still traded in and out of the market,
but I kept a core position of long calls. This core position was down
about 25 percent. Since for this account I used a money management
plan that limited my total investment to one-third of the equity, I was
down about 8 percent in terms of total equity.


--- PAGE 65 ---
M A R K D. C O O K
On January 7, for the first time, I received a call from the presi-
dent of the company. I had only been trading the account for one
week. "What do you think about the market? he asked.
I knew what was happening. He was getting worried calls from the
investors who were faceless people to me. "Well," I said, "my cumula-
tive tick indicator is very oversold." 1 explained to him that whenever
my index was deeply oversold, it signaled a major buying opportunity.
"How soon until the market goes up?" he asked.
"It can spring at any time," I said. "We need a catalyst, but I can't
tell you exactly when that will be."
"Your indicators don't work at all," he said. "The market is going
straight down."
"You can pull the plug," I said, "but I want you to understand that
if you do, the investors are going to know that you were the one who
closed out the positions, not me."
My secretary had been sitting there, listening to my end of the
conversation. When I hung up, she said, "Gosh, you were pretty
rough with him."
"Don't worry," I said, "he is not going to close the account and take
responsibility. He's going to leave me out there to hang."
On the night of January 10, the United States began its air attack
on Iraq, and the next day the market exploded on the upside. Not
only did the market go up tremendously, but the sharp increase in
volatility also caused option premiums to expand. On January 12, the
president of the company called me back.
Where was the account at this point?
The option position I held had nearly quadrupled. [Since Cook had
invested one-third of the equity, this implies that the account equity
had nearly doubled.] By this time, 1 had already started to take profits
on my position. Of course, he knew that I had started liquidating the
position when he called.
"What do you plan to do?" he asked.
I plan to continue to scale out of the position," I answered.
"But it's really going up now," he said. "Do you think it will con-
tinue?"
H A R V E S T I N G S&P P R O H T S
"Yes I do," I answered, "because my cumulative tick indicator is
still oversold."
"Then why don't you hold the position?" he asked.
"You don't understand," I said. "One reason the option premiums
have gone up so much is because of the explosion in volatility. [Option
prices depend on both the underlying market price and volatility]
Once the volatility starts to ease, option prices may not go up much
even if the market continues to rise. Also, 1 realize now, which I didn't
before you called me last week, that your investors are pretty nervous,
and they probably want money in their pockets. Isn't that right?"
"That's true," he answered.
"Fine," I said, "we'll continue to liquidate the position and take it
from there."
"Mark," he said, "that's why you are the trader you are." Those
were his exact words.
"Thanks for telling me I'm a good trader," I said for my secretary's
benefit, who had been listening to the conversation intently. "Now
you realize that my indicators work—don't you?"
"Oh yes," he answered, "your indicators work."
After I hung up the phone, my secretary said, "Wasn't that nice of
him to call and compliment you."
"Just watch," I said. "He will jerk this money just as soon as he can."
"Why would he do that?" she asked in disbelief.
"Because he can't stand the volatility, and he can't handle the
clients. He also doesn't understand what I am doing, which makes
him a terrible intermediary. His involvement will only lead to doubt
and skepticism among the clients. It would be different if I were talk-
ing to the clients directly and they could hear the confidence in my
voice." Ironically, I had chosen this type of structure because I
wanted to be at arm's length from the investors so that I wouldn't be
influenced by their emotions. Instead, I ended up with someone in
the middle who was just aggravating the situation. "He'll find some
excuse to pull the account," I told my secretary.
"How could he find an excuse," she asked, "when you have nearly
doubled their money?"


--- PAGE 66 ---
M A R K D. C O O K
"I don't know," I said, "but he will find something."
By that point, the option premiums had expanded so far that it vir-
tually eliminated any profit opportunities if you were only a buyer of
options, as I was. Buying options then was like paying Rolls-Royce
prices for a Yugo.
Did you stop trading?
Yes, 1 had to back off. I have to believe a trade has at least a 75 per-
cent chance of being right or else I won't put it on. I continued to
trade very lightly over the next few months, and the account drifted
sideways.
At the end of April, the president of the company called again.
"How come you're not trading anymore?" he asked. "Are you afraid?"
he sneered.
"Yes, I'm afraid, but not of what you think. I'm afraid of the mar-
ketplace. 1 don't see trades that will give me my 75 percent probabil-
ity of winning, and I'm not going to do any coin-flip trades."
"Well, my investors are expecting you to trade," he said. "Why
can't you do the same thing you did in January?"
"Because the market is not the same," I said. "We could do noth-
ing for the rest of the year and still have a good year."
"Yeah, you're still up 85 percent for the year," he admitted.
"And the investors aren't happy with that?" I asked.
"They saw you double their money in January, and they want you
to really go for it. You better do some more trades, Mark," he said.
"What does he want now?" my secretary asked after I hung up the
phone.
"Now he wants to force me to trade. Isn't that interesting. In Jan-
uary he wanted me to shut the account down, and now, when 1
shouldn't be trading, he wants me to trade more."
What did you do?
I thought I would put on one trade to keep him happy. Then if it
didn't work out, I could talk him out of pressuring me to trade. But as
soon as I put on the trade, I thought to myself that this is stupid; I'm
putting on a trade that I think may lose money to prove a point. Sure
enough, the trade lost money—not much, maybe 5 percent of the
equity. I backed off and stopped trading.
How were you getting compensated for these accounts?
I was supposed to get a percent of the profits.
The standard 20 percent of profits?
This will give you an idea of how naive I was at the time. They told
me, "Don't worry, we will make it right by you." I had nothing in writ-
ing. I went along with that because I was mainly interested in getting
a track record rather than earning anything on this account. I was so
hungry to get started that I would've taken virtually any deal.
At the end of May, the president called again. He told me that two
of the accounts were pulling their money. "Oh, I guess they have
some pressing financial needs," I conjectured.
"I'll be honest with you, Mark," he said, "there are more investors
that are right at the cusp of closing their accounts."
"Why?" I asked.
"Well, you haven't done anything for us lately," he answered.
"Do you realize how much the account is up?" I asked. "If you had
told these investors at the beginning of the year that they were going
to make 80 percent on their money, don't you think they would've
been ecstatic?"
"Yes, but you did more than that in the first month," he replied.
"During the past four months, you haven't made anything."
"Wait a minute," 1 said. "What expectations did these investors
have?"
"I showed them your track record for last year."
"You did what!" I exclaimed. "That track record was based on my
own account, which trades up to 100 percent of the equity. My
account will make three times as much as this account because of the
leverage, but the drawdowns will also be three times as large, and I
don't think your investors could handle 40 percent drawdowns."
Ten minutes later he called back and said, "We're shutting the
account down."
I was so mad, I could have spit blood. 1 don't know what he told
the investors to make them all pull their money simultaneously. That
was my first and last experience in managing any pooled money.
Did they ever pay you anything on the profits you had made?
Not a cent.


--- PAGE 67 ---
As Samuel Goldwyn said, "A verbal contract isn't worth the
paper it's written on." What happened after they closed the
account?
I was basically flat for the rest of the year because the environment
wasn't conducive to buying options. In November 1991, I signed up
for the 1992 U.S. Trading Championship, which by that time had
expanded from a four-month to a one-year contest. In preparation, I
researched all my past trades back to the 1970s to find out why I had
made money and why I had lost money. I found that Tuesdays were
my best day and Fridays my worst.
Why is that?
Because it takes me a little while to get warmed up. Mondays I am
just getting back into gear, and by Tuesday I'm ready to roll. By the
time I get to Friday, I've exhausted my energy, and if I have done well
for the week, I just don't have the drive and zeal. So what did I do in
1992? I didn't trade on any Fridays, and I traded more aggressively on
Tuesdays.
Did your trading change forever because of this analysis?
Oh yes, it was the best thing that I ever did. That's when I became a
very proficient trader.
What advice do you have for people who want to follow in your
footsteps and trade for a living?
If you decide to. trade for a living, you have to treat it just like any
other business endeavor and go into it with a plan. If you want to start
a business, and all you do is walk into a bank, smile pleasantly, and
ask for a $200,000 loan, do you think you'll get it? Are they going to
say, "You have a really nice smile; here's the money." I don't think so.
You need to have a solid business plan. The trouble is that most peo-
ple start trading without any definitive plan.
What would a business plan for traders include?
It should contain specific answers to all of the following questions:
> What markets are you going to trade? You need to select a market that
fits your personality because a market is a reflection of the people
who trade it. People who trade Internet stocks are definitely different
from people who trade utility stocks.
p. What is your trading capitalization? On the one hand, you should
honestly be able to say, "If I lose all this money, it won't change my
lifestyle." On the other hand, you need a large enough account so that
making at least as much as you do from your current job is a feasible
goal. Otherwise, you will think that you are a failure because you will
work harder as a trader than you do at the job you are in now.
»• How will orders be entered? Will you scale into positions or put them
on all at once? How will you exit losing trades? How will you exit win-
ning trades?
»• What type of drawdown will cause you to stop trading and reevaluate
your approach? What type of drawdown will cause you to shut down
trading?
^ What are your profit goals, measured on as short a time frame as is
feasible for your trading approach?
fr What procedure will you use for analyzing your trades?
>• What will you do if personal problems arise that could adversely
impact your trading?
> How will you set up your working environment so that it is conducive
to trading and maximizes your chances for success?
> How will you reward yourself for successful trading? Will you take a
special vacation, buy yourself a new car, etcetera?
>• How will you continue to improve yourself as a trader? What books
will you read? What new research projects will you do?
What other advice would you give to people who want to become
traders?
Approach trading as a vocation, not a hobby. I periodically give semi-
nars for traders. I once had a tennis pro who attended my four-day sem-
inar. On the third day, I asked people what they had learned so far and
how they were going to apply it. When it was his turn, he said, "I'm not
going to give up my tennis career. I give lessons on Tuesdays and Thurs-
days, so I'm going to trade on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays."
"If you do that," I told him, "I guarantee that Tuesdays and Thurs-
days will be the days when you will need to be watching the market.
You'll be making a hundred dollars giving a lesson and losing a thou-
sand dollars in the market."


--- PAGE 68 ---
M A R K D. C O O K
"I'm not going to have that problem," he said, "because I'm going
to close out my positions every day." Six months later, he gave up trad-
ing. He did two things wrong: First, his primary passion was tennis.
Second, trading wasn't a vocation to him; it was a hobby, and hobbies
cost you money.
What are some other reasons people fail as traders?
People underestimate the time it takes to succeed as a trader. Some
people come here and think they can sit with me for a week and
become great traders. How many people when they went to college
would've thought to walk up to the professor and say, "I know the
course is for a semester, but I think a week should be enough for me
to get it." Gaining proficiency is the same in trading as in any other
profession—it requires experience, and experience takes time.
A man who attended one of my seminars a number of years ago
asked me, "How long will it take me to become a professional trader
so 1 can quit my job and support my family?"
"Three to five years," I said.
"What! I'm going to do it in six months," he answered.
"Well, you're probably a lot smarter than I am," I said. "I didn't
make any money in my first five years."
It's seven years later, and he's still not profitable as a trader. You
can't expect to become a doctor or an attorney overnight, and trading
is no different. It is a vocation that takes time, study, and experience.
Wisdom is a product of knowledge and experience. If you have more
knowledge, you can get away with less experience and vice versa. If
you can get both, the learning curve is very steep.
Why else do people fail as traders?
Another common reason is undercapitalization. Sometimes I get
people at my seminars who want to start trading with $10,000. I tell
them that they should convert the $10,000 into hundred-dollar bills
and then flush them down the toilet one at a time because if they try
trading with $10,000, the result will be the same, but it will only
prolong the agony. Ten thousand dollars is not enough money to
trade.
All the reasons for failure you have mentioned so far relate to the
attitude with which people approach trading: a lack of commit-
ment or funds going in. What flaws besides attitude cause people
to fail as traders?
It's not a matter of intelligence, or even market knowledge. I've seen
people with good trading skills fail, and those without any previous
experience succeed. The main thing is that every trader has to be
honest about his or her weakness and deal with it. If you can't learn to
do that, you will not survive as a trader.
Several years ago, an option trader who had scheduled to come
visit me at my office asked whether I would be willing to review his
trades for the past year before he came. I agreed because I genuinely
want to teach people how to trade.
He said, "I had 84 percent winning trades last year."
"Good," I said, "did you make any money?"
"Well, no," he answered, "I lost money for the year."
"Then the 16 percent is what we need to focus on," I said.
"That's why I wanted to send you my trades."
He sent me his trades, and I found that out of about four hundred
trades he did that year, five trades accounted for almost all his losses.
At first I didn't notice any common denominator. Then I checked the
dates and discovered that four out of five of these trades had been
done on expiration Fridays. I called him up and said, "I found your
problem."
"Oh good," he said. "What did you find?"
"Four out of five of your big losing trades were done on an expira- .
tion Friday."
"Oh, I knew that," he answered.
"Well, there is a way to fix this problem," I told him.
"Good, good," he said. "I knew you would have the answer."
"Don't trade on expiration Fridays."
"Mark, what are you talking about? Those are the most exciting
trading days."
"You have to decide whether you want excitement or you want to
make money. Quit trading on expiration Fridays. Go out and do some-
thing else on those days."
"Oh no, I can't do that," he said. "I can't give up the action on that
day. I'll figure out how to fix the problem."


--- PAGE 69 ---
"If you don't fix this problem by quitting," I told him, "it's going to
quit you."
Six months later, he was bankrupt. He knew indicators inside and
out. He was a workaholic and very intelligent. He even knew how to
take losses most of the time. But he just couldn't stand aside on that
one trading day. He had identified his problem, but he couldn't fix it.
Any other stories come to mind about traders you tried to help,
but who ultimately failed?
A few years ago, a man who attended one my seminars called me for
advice. He told me that he wanted to become a full-time trader but
had been unsuccessful so far. I gave him some advice about devising
a business plan for his trading. He called a couple more times for
additional advice. On one such call, his voice suddenly dropped. "I
can hardly hear you," I said. "We must have a bad connection."
"No," he whispered, "my wife just walked into the room."
"She doesn't know how much money you have lost, does she?" I
asked.
"No," he admitted.
"You have to tell her the truth. If she doesn't support you, and you
are fearful of her, nothing I teach you will help. If you keep trading
secretly, one of two things will happen: you will lose all your money, or
you will lose your marriage." He didn't listen to me, and he ended up
losing both.
What happened during September—December 1997? It was the
only sustained losing period I saw in the statements you sent me
and completely uncharacteristic in terms of your other trading. I
believe you lost over $300,000 during a four-month period.
I find that as the year progresses, I tend not to do as well. I just chalk
it up to my getting tired or sloppy toward the end the year.
But that doesn't explain it. This period was so much worse than
any other period, including the latter part of other years, that
there must be some other explanation.
[Cook rambles on further, trying to explain in general terms why he
may have done poorly during that period. Then finally, a memory
clicks.] Ah, you're absolutely right! I had forgotten about it. In July
1997, I fell and severely tore the ACL in my knee [a ligament in the
center of the knee], I wore a brace and was on pain medication. I
finally had an operation in December.
Did the pain medication make you drowsy?
It threw my focus off. I wasn't as sharp. I felt as if I were moving in
slow motion. I was also worried that 1 might never be able to play bas-
ketball with my kids again.
It sounds like you were depressed during that period.
Yes, I had gone from being physically active, both in sports and on the
farm, to barely being able to walk. I put on over thirty pounds during
those few months.
If your operation was in December, then your trading seemed to
recover immediately afterward.
Yes it did. I felt so much better. I threw myself into rehabilitation,
although I probably overdid it. I'm a gung ho type of guy. Two weeks
after my operation, the physical therapist came over to me while I was
on the weight machine and said, "We do lots of rehabilitation on ACL
injuries. I will tell you just one thing, and maybe it will hit home: No
one we had in here after ACL reconstructive surgery ever lifted as
much weight as you are now. Do you get my point?" I backed off
immediately.
[About a week after the interview, I spoke to Cook on the phone,
and he told me he had asked his assistant, Stacie, about her impres-
sion of him during this injury period. She told him, "You couldn't
walk. You even had trouble sitting because you were in such discom-
fort. You had pain in your face. You were just a shell of yourself, and it
poured over into your trading. Once you had your operation, you were
like a different person."]
Were there any other periods where personal turmoil interfered
with your trading?
In September 1995, my father had a heart attack. He was in intensive
care for eight days. During that period, I punished myself by doing
every damaging trading mistake in the book.
Why did you feel responsible for your dad's heart attack?
He worked so hard. On the day he had his heart attack, it was over
ninety degrees, and he was baling hay. My mom told me that he felt a
little sick during the middle of the day, came back in, and then went


--- PAGE 70 ---
back out to work. He baled four hundred bales of hay on the day he
had his heart attack. I thought, "He's out there doing all that work for
$700 or $800, and I'm sitting in an air-conditioned office, making
$7,000 or $8,000." It didn't seem right to me, so I had to punish
myself. When I look back on the trades I did during that period, it
almost seems like temporary insanity.
Then you weren't doing your regular trades.
Oh no, I was doing almost the exact opposite.
Were you aware of what you were doing at the time?
I didn't care; I was totally despondent. I think I really wanted to lose
money.
For your style of trading, you have to watch the market closely all
day long. Have you had any situations where interruptions cost
you money?
The trade that sticks in my mind most was in January 1987. It was my
secretary's birthday. I never leave the office during the day when I
have a position on. But on that day, trying to be a nice guy, I took her
out for lunch to celebrate her birthday. When I left the office, the
option position I had on was up $30,000. When I came back after
lunch, the position was down $40,000. I couldn't believe the quotes.
I always remember that trade. Now I give my secretary a card for her
birthday [he chuckles].
It sounds like a very expensive lunch. Are you sure you would
have covered the position if you had stayed in the office?
Absolutely. That's one of my cardinal rules. I never let a profit turn
into a loss.
I've exhausted my questions. Any final words?
I represent the average guy out here in rural America, in the U.S.
Midwest. I sit in my great-grandfather's farmhouse, staring at a com-
puter screen, and I can make a living trading. That's why I believe
there is hope for people anywhere to do this. But you have to be will-
ing to work hard and pay your tuition, which is the money you lose
while you're learning how to trade. People ask me all the time, "How
long do you think it will take for me to succeed?" I tell them, "three to
five years of twelve-hour days and losing money." Very few people
want to hear that.
H A R V E S T I N G S & P P R O F I T S
It's not over until you give up. Mark D. Cook didn't just
encounter initial failure, he failed repeatedly and spectacularly, los-
ing his entire trading stake several times, and on one occasion, more
than his entire net worth. Yet despite that inauspicious beginning
and nearly a decade of false starts, Cook never gave up and ulti-
mately triumphed, developing the methodology, business plan, and
discipline that allowed him to extract triple-digit returns from the
market with astounding consistency.
In contrast to the conventional wisdom, which advises looking for
trades that offer a profit potential several times as large as the risk,
most of Cook's trading strategies seek to make one dollar for every
two dollars risked. This observation provides two important lessons,
neither of which is that using a wider risk level than the profit objec-
tive is a generally attractive approach.
First, looking at the probability of winning is every bit as essential
as looking at the ratio of potential gain to risk. As Cook demon-
strates, a strategy can lose more on losing trades than it gains on
winning trades and still be a terrific approach if its probability of
winning is high enough. Conversely, a strategy could make ten times
as much on winning trades as it gives up on losing trades and still
lead to financial ruin if the probabilities are low enough. Consider,
for example, betting continuously on the number seven in roulette:
when you win, you will win thirty-six times what you bet, but if you
play long enough, you are guaranteed to lose all your money because
your odds of success are only one in thirty-eight.
Second, in choosing a trading approach, it is essential to select a
method that fits your personality. Cook is happy to take a small profit
on a trade but hates to take even a small loss. Given his predisposi-
tion, the methodologies he has developed, which accept a low
return/risk ratio on each trade in exchange for a high probability of
winning, are right for him. But these same methods could be very
uncomfortable, and hence unprofitable, for others to trade. Trading
is not a one-size-fits-all proposition; each trader must tailor an indi-
vidual approach.


--- PAGE 71 ---
M A R K D. 
C O O K ?
Personal problems can decimate a trader's performance. Con-
sider, for example, Cook's uncharacteristic large losses during his
knee injury and his father's heart attack. The moral is: If you are
experiencing physical or emotional distress, either stop trading alto-
gether, or reduce your trading activity to a level at which you can't do
much damage. If Cook himself is guilty of any serious trading sin
during the past decade, it is failing to heed this advice—a mistake he
is determined not to repeat.
Most aspiring traders underestimate the time, work, and money
required to become successful. Cook is adamant that to succeed as a
trader requires a complete commitment. You must approach trading
as a full-time business, not as a part-time interest. Just as in any
entrepreneurial venture, you must have a solid business plan, ade-
quate financing, and a willingness to work long hours. Those seeking
shortcuts need not apply. And even if you do everything right, you
should still expect to lose money during the first few years—losses
that Cook views as tuition payments to the school of trading. These
are cold, hard facts that many would-be traders prefer not to hear or
believe, but ignoring them doesn't change the reality.
ALPHONSE "BUDDY" FLETCHER JR.
Win-Win Investing
Every investment expert knows that you can't achieve high returns, say an
average of 40 or 50 percent per year, without taking on significant risk.
Apparently, no one ever bothered to explain this basic concept to
Alphonse Fletcher Jr. Otherwise he would have known better than to try
to generate consistent high returns, with hardly any losing months, as he
has done since placing his first trade thirteen years ago.
Fletcher began his financial career at Bear Stearns as a researcher
and trader of the firm's own funds. After two very successful years, he
was lured away to a similar position at Kidder Peabody* Although he
loved working at Bear Stearns and was very reluctant to leave, Kidder's
job offer was just too lucrative to turn down. In addition to his salary, Kid-
der promised Fletcher a 20 to 25 percent bonus on his trading profits.
In his first year at Kidder, Fletcher made over $25 million for the firm.
Instead of the $5-million-plus bonus he had anticipated, however, Kidder
paid him $1.7 million, with a promise to make additional deferred pay-
ments over the next few years. When Fletcher protested that the com-
pany was reneging on its deal with him, he was told he shouldn't
complain because he was "one of the highest paid black males" in the
country. One company officer is alleged to have commented that the
bonus Kidder was obligated to pay Fletcher was "simply too much money
to pay a young black man." These quotes were taken from the court tran-
scripts in the suit that Fletcher brought against his former employer with
*The facts related to Fletcher's employment at Kidder Peabody were obtained from
court-case summaries and articles appearing in Business Week (October 24, 1994),
The New Yorker (April 29 & May 6, 1996), and Fortune (July 5, 1999).
127


--- PAGE 72 ---
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " F L E T C H E R J R .
other specifics derived from published articles; Fletcher himself was very
reluctant to discuss the details of the episode. Fletcher was ultimately
awarded an additional $ 1.26 million by an arbitration panel. After leaving
Kidder, Fletcher founded his own firm, Fletcher Asset Management.
I visited Fletcher on one of those brutally hot, humid New York City
summer afternoons. I always prefer to walk in cities whenever possible as
opposed to taking taxis or public transportation. But 1 was running a bit
late for my scheduled interview with Fletcher, so I hopped a cab. The
Midtown traffic was horrendous. After going two short blocks in five min-
utes, about one-third of my normal walking pace, I handed the driver a
$5 bill and jumped out, still a mile and a half from my destination.
By the time I arrived at Fletcher Asset Management, I must have
looked as if I had walked through a shower. The offices are located in a
120-year-old limestone townhouse on the Upper East Side. I stepped
through the large, heavy wooden door, moving from the heat and noise of
the modern city into a cool, quiet, and elegant interior. The entranceway
led to a large circular reception area with soaring ceilings and a hand-
crafted spiral wooden staircase that rose to the offices on the four upper
floors. The walls were painted in warm, rich complementary colors,
which when combined with the lofty ceilings, wide ornamental moldings,
and antique furniture created an atmosphere of a different time and
place, far removed from New York City circa 1999. If I were filming a
movie with a scene at an old-line Swiss investment firm catering to clients
with tens or hundreds of millions of dollars, this would be the perfect set.
I was led into a library that served as a waiting room and was offered
a large pitcher of ice water, which I rapidly gulped down as soon as the
attendant left the room. After about ten minutes, I was escorted up the
staircase to Fletcher's office.
It is clear that Fletcher has deliberately created an environment that
is in striking contrast to the typical modern Manhattan office. The result
is very effective in creating a tranquil sanctuary from the frenzy of the
city outside, with a sense of style that must send a subliminal message to
investors: your money will be safe here.
Fletcher, however, doesn't need impressive offices to attract investors.
His performance results almost defy belief. That is not to say that he has
the highest returns around—not by a long shot. However, those who look
W I N - W I N I N V E S T I N G
only at returns suffer from extreme naivete. It is not return that matters,
but rather return relative to risk. Here Fletcher shines. The Fletcher
Fund, his flagship fund, founded in September 1995, has realized an
average annual compounded return of 47 percent. Although this is quite
impressive on its own, here is the lacker: He has achieved this return
with only four losing months, the largest of these being a minuscule 1.5
percent decline.
Fletcher's track record prior to launching his fund is, if anything, even
more astounding. During the first four years of its existence, Fletcher's
firm, which was founded in 1991, primarily traded its own proprietary
account. This account, which was traded at much higher leverage than
his fund, garnered an incredible average annual compounded return of
380 percent during that period. (Although returns in these earlier years
are not published or reported in any way because they represent a propri-
etary account, the figures have been audited.)
When I first saw Fletcher's track record, I couldn't conceive how he
could achieve such a substantial return with virtually no risk. In our
meeting, he explained exactly how he does it. Yes, in reading this chapter,
you will find out as well. However, so as not to create false expectations,
I will tell you at the outset that his methods are not duplicable by ordi-
nary investors. Even so, why would he reveal what he does? The answer
is explained in the interview.
When did you first develop an interest in the markets?
It probably started when I was in junior high school and my father
and I worked on developing a computer program to pick winners at
the dog racetrack. [He laughs robustly at ike memory.]
Did you have any success trying to forecast dog races?
Oh yes. The computer would eliminate one set of races it couldn't
predict. In the remaining races, the program had an 80 percent accu-
racy rate in picking a dog that would place in the money [win, place,
or show].
That's pretty impressive. How much money did you make?
I learned an interesting lesson about odds: winning 80 percent of
the time may not be enough if the odds are not right. I forget the


--- PAGE 73 ---
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " RIIKHER J R !
exact number, but the track takes about 40 percent or more off the
table.
Wow, that's incredible—that even makes slot machines look good!
So even though we won 80 percent of the time, it still wasn't enough
to make any money.
What information were you using to predict the race outcome?
All the information that comes in the racing program—finish times
for the dogs in different races, positions at different poles, weather
conditions, etc.
How did you try to solve this problem? Did you use multiple
regression?
Hey, remember I was only in junior high.
When did you actually get involved with stocks?
When I was in college, I had a summer job with Pfizer, and they had
an employee program that allowed you to buy stock in the company
for a 25 percent discount. That sounded like a great deal to me. Iron-
ically, as we fast-forward to the present, both of these principles—the
computerized analysis of odds and buying stock at a discount—are
hallmarks of what we do today. Of course, I don't mean this literally,
since we don't buy stocks at a discount, and we don't make bets on
who's going to be the winner. Nevertheless, those concepts tie into
our current strategies in a remarkable way.
Let's go back to your origins. How did you actually get involved
in trading the market?
I graduated Harvard with a math degree. At the time, everyone was
going into M.B.A. programs or Wall Street.
As a math major at Harvard, I assume that you must have had
phenomenal SAT scores.
Let's just say that I did very well. The funny thing is that I didn't take
any of the SAT preparatory courses. I prefer to figure out things for
myself rather than learn the tricks of the trade. I'm still like that today.
Sometimes I play word or math games for fun.
For example.
This is my latest thing. [He picks up an abacus.] I have no interest in
reading instructions on how to use it, but I am intrigued by the idea of
trying to figure it out for myself. I want to work out what algorithm
W I N - W N I N V E S T NG
you would use to do addition, subtraction, multiplication, and divi-
sion on this instrument.
Did you plan to go to Wall Street when you finished college?
No, actually I planned to go into the air force
Why the air force?
I had been in air force ROTC in college, and the idea of becoming a
weapons officer and being responsible for all the new high-tech
equipment appealed to me.
Did you join the air force?
No. In the late 1980s, there were significant cuts in the defense
budget. In order to reduce the number of personnel, the air force
encouraged us to go into the reserves. A good friend convinced me to
look for a job on Wall Street. I was offered a position at Bear Stearns
and fell in love with the place. They in turn virtually adopted me. I
don't know what the magic was, but Elliot Wolk, who was a member
of the board of directors and the head of the options department, took
a liking to me.
Were any of your courses at Harvard helpful in preparing you for
the real world?
In my senior year, I took a graduate-level course in financial engineer-
ing. I did my project on the options market and found it fascinating. ]
tried to model what would happen if an option price was forced away
from its theoretical value, say because someone placed a large buy or
sell order that moved the market. My results convinced me that I had
found a way to consistently capture profits in the options market. The
idea that I could develop a model that would consistently make
money in options, however, went against all the theory I had learned
about the markets.
From that comment I take it that, at the time, you believed in the
efficient market hypothesis, as it was taught at Harvard.
Yes indeed [he laughs loudly]. In many respects, I still believe it, but
as you'll see, there is an interesting other side.
You believe it—in what sense? After all, your own performance
seems to belie the theory that markets are perfectly efficient.
If IBM is trading at $100 right now, it's probably worth $100. I think
it is very difficult to outsmart liquid markets.


--- PAGE 74 ---
A l P H O N S E " B U D D Y " fISEHER JR.
You mean by using a methodology that depends on getting the
future price direction right?
That's correct.
So where doesn't the efficient market hypothesis apply—say in
your own case?
My analysis implied that it was possible to implement offsetting
trades, in which the total position had little or no risk and still pro-
vided a profit opportunity. In the real world, such discrepancies might
occasionally occur because a large buy or sell order might knock a
specific option or security out of whack with the rest of the market.
In a theoretical model, however, it should be impossible to show a
consistent risk-free opportunity if the efficient market hypothesis is
correct. As it turned out, my model was right. In fact, it was the basis
for the very first trade I did for Bear Stearns, and it was very lucrative
for them.
What was this virtually risk-free market opportunity that you say
was consistently available?
The concept was based on the cost of financing. Sure IBM is worth
whatever it's trading at. However, let's say that I can earn 7 percent on
my money, and you can earn 9 percent on your money. Given the
assumption of our having different rates of return on our money, I
should be able to buy IBM and sell it to you at a future date for some
agreed price, and we would both be better off. For example, I might
buy IBM at $100 and agree to sell it to you for $108 one year from
now. 1 would make more than my 7 percent assumed alternative rate
of return, and you would lock in ownership of IBM at less than your
assumed opportunity cost of 9 percent annualized. The transaction
would be mutually beneficial.
Wouldn't arbitrage drive that opportunity away?
Arbitrage will only eliminate opportunities where we both have the
same costs of funds. If, however, your cost of funds is significantly
higher or lower, then there will be an opportunity. In a more general
sense, the markets might be priced very efficiently if everyone had
the same costs of funds, received the same dividend, and had the
same transaction costs. If, however, one set of investors is treated
W I N - W I N INVESill
very differently, and persistently treated differently, then it should
be possible to set up a transaction that offers a consistent profit
opportunity.
Give me a specific example.
Instead of IBM, say we're talking about an Italian computer com-
pany. Assume that because of tax withholding, U.S. investors re-
ceive only 70 cents on the dollar in dividends, whereas Italian
investors receive the full dollar. If this is the case, a consistent arbi-
trage becomes available, wherein a U.S. investor could sell the
stock to an Italian investor, establish a hedge, and after the dividend
has been paid, buy it back at terms that would be beneficial to both
parties.
It almost sounds as if you are performing a service. If I under-
stand you correctly, you find buyers and sellers who have differ-
ent costs or returns, due to a distortion, such as differences in
tax treatment. You then devise a transaction based on this differ-
ence in which each party ends up better off, and you lock in a
profit for performing the transaction.
Exactly. The key word you used was service. That's one of the key rea-
sons why the results we have delivered are so different from those of
traditional investment managers, who buy and sell and then hope for
the best.
How could you ever lose in that type of transaction?
Very easily. It is very important that there is a real economic trade in
which the Italian investor actually buys the shares and is the holder of
those shares at the time of the dividend payment. If that's the case,
then there are real transactions, with real exposure to economic gains
and losses, and something can go wrong. For example, if there is an
adverse price movement after the trade and before we can fully
implement the hedge, then we could lose money.
The trading opportunity based on the option model you devel-
oped in college, however, was obviously different, since it only
involved U.S. markets. What was the idea behind that strategy?
In my model, I was using two different interest rates. I found that
assumption led to a consistent profit opportunity.


--- PAGE 75 ---
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " 
F L E T C H E R 
J R .
Why were you using two different interest rates?
I used the risk-free interest rate [T-bill rate] to generate theoretical
option values, and I used a commercial interest rate to reflect the per-
spective of an option buyer who had a cost of borrowing funds that
was greater than the risk-free rate. As a consequence of using two dif-
ferent rates, trading opportunities appeared.
What precisely was the anomaly you found?
The market was pricing options based on a theoretical model that
assumed a risk-free rate. For most investors, however, the relevant
interest rate was the cost of borrowing, which was higher. For exam-
ple, the option-pricing model might assume a 7 percent interest rate
while the investor might have an 8 percent cost of borrowing. This
discrepancy implied a profit opportunity.
What was the trading strategy implied by this anomaly?
An option box spread.
[If you are one of the few readers who understands this, congratula-
tions. If, however, you think an option box spread is a quilt design, a
sexual position, or some other equally accurate conjecture, don't
worry about it. Any explanation I might attempt would only serve to
confuse you further. Take my word for it. For the purpose of what fol-
lows, it is sufficient to know that an option box spread is a trade that
involves the simultaneous implementation of four separate option
positions.]
Given the substantial transaction costs (commissions plus
bid/ask differentials), is this trade applicable in the real world?
You're quite right. Normally, the interest rate differences are not suffi-
ciently wide to offer any consistent opportunity once trading costs are
taken into account. The key point, however, is that there are excep-
tions, and it is these exceptions that provide the profit opportunity.
For example, a corporation that has a large capital loss would have to
pay the full tax rate on interest income, but would not have any tax
obligation if they earned the equivalent income in an option trade
[because the capital gain on the option trade would be offset by their
existing capital loss]. Assume their short-term interest rate is 8 per-
cent and they can implement an option box spread at levels that
JlVIN-WIN I N V E S T I N G
imply the same 8 percent return. Although it is the same return, the
corporation would be much better off because the return is a capital
gain instead of interest income. To them, the return would look more
like 11 percent.
Where do you get your income on the trade?
Initially, we made money either by implementing the transaction for
the corporation and charging a commission, or by taking the other
side of the trade. The difference in the tax treatment of different par-
ties is what creates the profit opportunity. I would add that although
. the examples I have given you used illustrations in which the eco-
nomic profits were enhanced by tax benefits, most of our trades are
not tax-related.
What was your job at Bear Stearns?
I had no specific responsibilities; I was just told to figure out how to
add value to the company. I started a couple of months before the
1987 stock crash. While all my friends are trading stocks and bonds,
and the market is crashing and layoffs are going on, I'm sitting there
without any specific responsibility and a mission to figure out how to
make money in the Bear Stearns style.
And exactly what is that?
To commit very little capital, take on very little risk, and still make a
significant return consistently. And if you can't do that, they don't
want to put their money into the trade. They are a very smart firm.
Even though you were left to come up with your own ideas, you
must have had an immediate superior.
Sure, Elliot Wolk.
Did you learn anything from him?
A great deal. One useful piece of advice he gave me, which summa-
rized the philosophy of Bear Stearns was: Never make a bet you can't
afford to lose. My extreme aversion to risk traces back to Bear
Stearns. To this day, I am deeply appreciative of the opportunity they
gave me and for what I learned at the firm.
Why did you leave Bear Stearns?
Kidder made me a great offer. It was really hard to leave. My initial
intentions were to stay at Bear Stearns for my whole career.


--- PAGE 76 ---
A L P H D N S E " B U D D Y " FLTTCHER J R .
W I N - W I N I N V E S T !
Was this the proverbial deal you couldn't refuse?
Yes.
Did Bear Stearns try to counteroffer?
I met with Ace Greenberg, Bear Stearns's CEO at that time, over
the course of two days, but his only real response was advice. He
told me that the deal sounded too good to be true and that I should
just continue to make my bet with Bear Stearns. It turns out that he
was right. It's a shame, because I was really excited about going to
Kidder Peabody. Not only did the firm have a great history, but the
opportunities that existed with General Electric as the majority
shareholder were truly remarkable. Unfortunately, some misunder-
standings and miscommunication with management caused an
uncomfortable situation. At that point, it was best for me to just
leave.
I already know the situation you're talking about. It was amply
reported in the press. I prefer to get the story directly from you,
however, as opposed to secondhand. I also know that the result-
ing legal suits were resolved, and therefore there is no legal
restriction to your talking about the case.
The only restriction is that I really love not to dwell on it [he laughs]. I
am glad it is all over. Kidder was great for me in many ways and bad
for me in many ways. Essentially, they offered me a great deal to come
over, and then the deal changed. Then they said a number of things
that were very insensitive and impolite. So I left them and won the
arbitration on the contract dispute. A suit on race discrimination
ended up being unsuccessful—good riddance.
[Based on public documents, this suit was not lost on the merits
of the discrimination case, but rather because the New York Court
of Appeals ruled that the standard registration form signed by
Fletcher as a condition of employment compelled arbitration.
Although the court ruled against Fletcher's petition because it felt
such a decision was dictated by the letter of the law, the written
opinion appeared to reflect a reluctant tone: "We stress that there is
no disagreement among the members of this court about the general
proposition that racial, gender, and all other forms of invidious dis-
crimination are ugly realities that cannot be countenanced and that
should be redressable through the widest possible range of reme-
dies . . ."]
If you don't mind my asking, other than this particular episode,
have you encountered prejudice elsewhere in the industry?
I have definitely experienced some things, but it is usually more sub-
tle. I really prefer not to dwell on it.
I'm just curious whether prejudice is still a factor.
Frankly, whenever there's a difficult situation, race is always one of
those easy cards to play. For example, if someone is envious. Usually,
nothing is direct. Ultimately it's a very subtle issue, and you never
know for sure. Someone acts in a certain way, and you think it is one
thing, but eventually you find out that it's not. In the last eight years,
I haven't seen anything . . . actually, I guess I have seen a number of
things that are somewhat direct [laughing]. My view is that as long as
I do the best I can for the people who put their trust in me—my
investors, my employees, and the companies I invest in—then every-
thing else will take care of itself.
When I read about the whole episode, I thought it was pretty
gutsy of you to bring a legal suit instead of taking a settlement. I
assume that you just wanted to fight back.
I didn't want to be adversarial, but they were sooo . . . . You got me
talking about it; I didn't want to talk about it. [He laughs long and
hard.] Kidder was great, GE was great, and I really wanted to be there
for a long time. If they had said to me, "We're going to pay you half
the amount we agreed to, and we'll work out the remainder," I proba-
bly could have lived with that. I wouldn't have minded those issues if
they were prepared to let me be part of the team and really participate
and contribute going forward. But far worse than the compensation
issue was the treatment—the attitude that I didn't belong and some
of the comments from senior management.
So it wasn't just one person.
No, it wasn't just one person.
But what's odd is that you did so well for them.
Sometimes, I think that makes it worse.
But that's what I don't understand. They hired you. It's not as if
they suddenly discovered you are black. Oh well, I guess there is


--- PAGE 77 ---
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " FLETCHER JR
no reason to expect prejudice to be logical. How did you go
about starting your own firm when you left Kidder?
I went back to Ace Greenberg. Bear Stearns set me up with an office
and gave me access to its very supportive clearance department, which
provided financing and brokerage services for professional investors.
What did Bear Stearns get out of this deal?
I still had very friendly relationships with the people at Bear Stearns.
To some extent, they just wanted to help me out. But it was also ben-
eficial to them because they gained a customer. Based on their previ-
ous experience with me, I'm sure they assumed that I would generate
significant brokerage business for them.
After I left Ace's office, I went downstairs to the computer store
and bought myself a Macintosh, which I set up on my dining room
table. I constructed the spreadsheets for a transaction opportunity I
saw would be feasible over the next few days and then faxed the
sheets to a Fortune 50 company for whom I had done similar deals
that had worked out well. They liked the idea and gave me the go-
ahead. The next day I opened the account at Bear Stearns and did
the other necessary preparations for the trade. On the third day, I
executed the transaction, and on the fourth day, I went to the bank
to open an account for $ 1 00 so that I could receive the fee as a wire
transfer. In effect, Fletcher Asset Management was funded for
$100.
Could you elaborate on the strategies you're using today.
A common theme in all our strategies involves finding someone who
is either advantaged or disadvantaged and then capitalizing on their
advantage or minimizing their disadvantage. Arbitrage opportunities
are very difficult to find without that type of an angle.
We are still pretty active in the dividend capture strategy we talked
about earlier. Our primary current activity, however, involves finding
good companies with a promising future that need more capital, but
can't raise it by traditional means because of a transitory situation.
Maybe it's because their earnings were down in the previous quarter
and everyone is saying hands-off, or maybe it's because the whole sec-
tor is in trouble. For whatever reason, the company is temporarily dis-
advantaged. That is a great opportunity for us to step in. We like to
^ W I N - W I N IK V E S T ING
approach a company like that and offer financial assistance for some
concession.
For example, in a recent deal involving a European software com-
pany, we provided $75 million in exchange for company stock. How-
ever, instead of pricing the stock at the prevailing market price, which
was then $9, the deal was that we could price the stock at a time of
our choosing up to three years in the future, but with the purchase
price capped at $16. If the price of the stock falls to $6, we will get
$75 million worth of stock at $6 per share. If, however, the stock goes
up to $20, we will get $75 million worth of stock at a price of $16 per
share because that was the maximum we agreed to. In effect, if the
stock goes down we're well protected, but if the stock goes up a lot,
we have tremendous opportunity.
Are you tben totally eliminating the risk?
The risk is reduced by a very significant amount, but not totally. There
is still risk if the company goes bankrupt. This risk, however, is small
because we are only selecting companies we consider to be relatively
sound. In fact, a senior officer of one of the companies we previously
invested in is now part of our own staff and helps us evaluate the
financial prospects of any new investments. With this expertise in-
house, it would be rare for us to choose a company that went bankrupt.
The logic of the transaction is pretty clear to me. As long as the
company doesn't go bankrupt, if the stock goes down, stays about
unchanged, or goes up moderately, you will at least break even,
and if it goes up a lot, you can make a windfall gain. Although
there is nothing wrong with that, doesn't it imply that the vast
majority of times these transactions will end up being a wash and
that significant profits will occur only sporadically? Why wouldn't
you end up with an equity curve that is fairly flat most of the
time, with only occasional upward spikes?
Two reasons. First, the money we invest in the company doesn't just
lie idle; it generates annual income—8.5 percent using the example
we just discussed—until we price the stock. Second, since the maxi-
mum price we will have to pay for the stock is capped—$16 in our
example—we can sell out-of-the-money calls against this position,
thereby guaranteeing an additional minimum revenue.


--- PAGE 78 ---
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " fLFPCHER JR
[By selling options that give buyers the right to buy the stock at a
specified price above the current price, Fletcher gives up part of his
windfall profit in the event the stock price rises sharply. But, in
exchange, he collects premiums (that is, the cost of the options) that
augment his income on the deal regardless of what happens to the
stock price.]
But are there always traded options in the companies you are
financing through these stock purchase agreements?
Well, it's not always possible to get a perfect hedge. But even when
there are no options traded for the specific company, we can some-
times use private "over-the-counter" options. We can also use index
options against a basket of companies in our transactions. The
assumption is that if the stock index rises a lot, then the stocks of the
companies we have invested in are likely to rise sharply as well. In
fact, since we are buying stocks that have been under pressure and
are more speculative in nature, if the market docs well, these stocks
may rise more than the average.
Taking into account the interest income and the option-selling
income, it appears that you are virtually guaranteed to make at
least a moderate profit on every transaction of this kind, and
only lose in the disaster scenario.
Even in the disaster scenario, which again is unlikely because of the
way we select our stocks, we can still sometimes protect ourselves by
buying out-of-the-money puts, which at the strike prices implied by a
bankruptcy are pretty cheap.
How long have you been employing this type of strategy?
For about seven years, and it has now grown to become our single
most important market activity. The strategy actually evolved from
the dividend capture strategy. [The strategy described previously in
Fletcher's example of U.S. investors holding shares in an Italian
computer company.] One variation of the dividend capture strategy
is dividend reinvestment, wherein companies allow shareholders to
reinvest their dividends in the stock at a discounted price. We have
been very active in buying shares from parties who did not want to be
bothered with reinvestment. We would therefore be the recipient of
W I N - W I N INVESTING!
$1 million of dividends and then elect to reinvest it, receiving $1.05
million of newly issued stock.
Why would a company give you more stock than the amount of
the dividend?
Because the companies that provided this offer wanted to conserve
their capital and were willing to grant shareholders a 5 percent dis-
count as an incentive to reinvest their dividends in the stock.
Is it common for companies to offer this type of dividend rein-
vestment?
It is popular among companies with high dividends who don't want to
cut their dividends but need to preserve capital. For example, it was
particularly prevalent among the banks in the early 1990s when they
were trying to increase their equity.
Eventually, some companies started to offer shareholders the
option to purchase additional discounted shares in an amount equiv-
alent to the dividend reinvestment. Then some companies began
waiving limits, allowing investors to buy virtually any amount of stock
at a discounted price.
In the early 1990s, many banks were actively pursuing this type
of program, and we participated heavily. That experience led us to
going to a major U.S. electronics company in 1992 in what proved to
be our first private equity funding deal. At the time, this company
couldn't raise capital through a stock offering because they'd had a
bad quarter and the prevailing attitude was: "I don't want to buy
newly issued stock from that company." That's probably the best time
to buy newly issued stock. When do you want to buy it—after they've
reported record earnings [he laughs]!1 But that's the way it works, and
it was a perfect opportunity for us to step in and say here's the check.
We told the company that we would buy $15 million worth of
stock from them over a period of time. We stressed that we wanted it
to be a very friendly and supportive deal. Therefore, instead of buying
stock at a discount, we proposed being compensated by an option to
buy more stock in the future. In this way, our incentives were per-
fectly aligned with the interests of management and shareholders. As
we discussed earlier, in this type of arrangement, our most significant


--- PAGE 79 ---
A L P H O N S E "BUDDY
CHER JRl
profit opportunity arises when the company does very well, although
because of our hedge, we should be consistently profitable.
We had a wonderful relationship with this company. In fact, their
former CFO ended up joining us. He's the one at Fletcher Asset
Management who explains who we are to the companies we approach
and manages the negotiations and ensuing relationships.
There's no better salesman than a satisfied customer. How did
you sell a major corporation on your financing transaction, since
you had never done anything like that before?
That's a good question. When I first approached them, we were this
tiny firm working out of rented space at Bear Stearns. Their initial
reaction was: Who are you? Merrill Lynch couldn't get us a secondary
offering, Lazard is our adviser, and you are calling out of the blue to
tell us that you can do the deal."
I talked to a neighbor in my apartment building, Steve Rattner,
who was a senior banker at Lazard. 1 told him that I was interested in
doing a deal with a company that his firm was advising. I asked him to
help me. He made a few phone calls, and the next thing I knew, I was
on a flight to Chicago along with a banker from Lazard and our attor-
ney to meet with the company. When the deal was all done, Steve
said to me, "That was an extremely interesting transaction. Have you
thought about taking on outside capital?"
Didn't the idea of raising outside capital to fund your transac-
tions occur to you before this deal?
Sure, the idea had come up a number of times before. However, every
time we considered it, we asked ourselves why we should take money
from investors, and give up the bulk of the profits, when we can bor-
row money to do the deal, and keep 100 percent of the profits?
Exactly, so why did you start a fund open to outside investors?
The big change was realizing that a friend like Steve could get us in the
door where such a great transaction could happen. Wouldn't it be nice
to have other friends like that who had a vested interest in our success.
So the primary motivation wasn't necessarily raising extra capi-
tal, but rather getting investors who would be allies.
Yes, that was the point Steve made that caught my attention. Raising
capital, however, did provide some additional benefits over borrowing
IftMN-WIN I N V E S T I N G
by allowing us to do many more transactions, thereby reducing our
portfolio risk through greater diversification.
Using the U.S. electronics company as an example, I assume
that if Steve had not been there, the deal would never have hap-
pened.
Exactly. We have some incredibly insightful people as investors whom
I can call for advice.
It almost sounds as if you have selected your own investors.
Essentially, we have. We have turned away a number of investors, par-
ticularly in the U.S. fund.
If someone comes to you and wants to invest a couple of million
dollars, you won't automatically open the account?
Oh no, we have actually researched everyone who wanted to invest
before they invested.
So you actually screen your investors.
Yes, investors are screened by either us or our marketing representa-
tives.
And the reason?
If we were just looking to raise as much money as we could, sure, the
more the merrier. At this point, we just want supportive investors. It is
not worth the trouble having an investor who would be a distraction.
Maybe in the future, with other pools of money, we may be less judg-
mental, but right now we want investors who will be friends and
allies.
But, surely, not every investor is someone who will have useful
contacts or be a source of advice.
If they are not, though, then they are usually either friends or fam-
ily. For example, the head trader's mother, who is a retired librarian,
is one of our investors, as is my own mother, who is a retired school
principal. In fact, eight of our mothers and mothers-in-law are in-
vestors in the fund. By the way, our mothers are the most demanding
investors.
In what way?
They have no qualms about demanding an explanation for anything,
from the reason for a slow start to the year to the reason for a particu-
larly good month.


--- PAGE 80 ---
A L P H O N S E "JBUDDY'-lraiTCHER
What prevents competitors from coming in and doing private
equity funding deals similar to the ones you did with the U.S.
electronics company and the European software company?
They come in all the time. In each of the strategies we have dis-
cussed, competition has increased and will continue to do so. That's
the nature of the market. Our advantage is that we were there first.
What is unique about our firm is that we never imitate someone else's
strategy. Another advantage we enjoy is that we try to construct our
deals so that they are fair to both the company and us. As a result of
our approach, over time we have been able to evolve from doing deals
with companies worth several hundred million dollars to companies
whose market size is measured in billions.
Even though you have an advantage, with this one core strategy
providing most of your profits, what happens if the field becomes
sufficiently crowded to reduce the profit margins meaningfully?
Well, we are always working on developing new strategies. Our think-
ing is: Let the competition move in, we'll be onto the next thing.
For example?
For example, right now we are deliberately using strategies that are
uncorrelated with the stock market. There is tremendous demand,
however, for an investment program correlated with the stock market
that could consistently outperform the S&P 500. I would love to take
on that challenge.
A lot of people have come up with the idea of S&P enhance-
ment programs. Haven't any of these enhanced S&P funds been
successful?
Even the ones that have come close to doing it haven't quite done it.
These funds have attempted to beat the S&P 500 by 1 percent or a
few percent, but they have not been consistent.
How do they try to do it?
At one extreme, P1MCO buys S&P futures for the stock exposure
and tries to provide the additional 100 basis points return by manag-
ing a fixed income portfolio.
Sure, that would work if interest rates are stable or go down. But
if interest rates rise, aren't they taking the risk of a loss on their
bond portfolio?
W I N - W I N I N V E S T !
Yes, they definitely are. In effect, all they are really doing is taking the
active manager risk in the fixed income market as opposed to the
equity market.
What other approaches have people used to try to consistently
outperform the S&P 500 benchmark?
Some people attempt to beat the S&P 500 by trying to pick the best
stocks in each sector. They will balance their sector investments to match
the S&P 500, but within each sector they will weight certain stocks more
heavily than others. For example, they might weight their portfolio in
favor of GM versus Ford, or vice versa, depending on their analysis.
Have you thought of a way of consistently beating the S&P 500?
Oh, sure.
Then why haven't you started trading it as a model program?
We've been very busy. We will probably start it soon.
How did the idea of an S&P 500 enhancement program come
to you?
I kept reading about the never-ending debate between those who felt
active managers were better and those who felt you couldn't beat the
index, implying passive managers were better. I thought it would be
really exciting to be able to consistently beat the index.
I understand how the idea for the product occurred to you, but
what I am asking is how did you get the idea of how to do it?
I have to be tight-lipped here because we haven't launched this pro-
gram yet. I was able to talk about our other strategies because the
competition has already figured out what we are doing and has begun
to move in.
So you haven't initiated this S&P 500 enhancement program yet,
but once you do, the competition will know what you're doing.
Then we can talk about it [he laughs].
The strategies you describe sound so well hedged and your risk
numbers are so low that I'm curious if you ever had a trade that
went really bad, and if so, what went wrong?
One of the companies we invested in declared bankruptcy. Our pro-
tective strategies worked well, but they can only work up to a limit.
What is the whole story?
Don't make me relive it [he laughs]. This is our worst story by far.


--- PAGE 81 ---
A L P H O N S E "BUDJ)Y" F L E T C H E R JR
The worst story is always more interesting than the best story.
Yes, I always focus on this episode whenever I talk to new investors.
The company, which was a marketer of prepaid phone cards, needed
financing. Although the deal was marginal, we decided to do it. Two
weeks after the deal was completed, the company announced that all
their financial statements were wrong and would be revised for the
past two years. The stock dropped over 70 percent overnight. It hap-
pened so quickly that we didn't have time to get our hedges fully in
place. Although the company still had a viable business and assets,
they declared bankruptcy to facilitate the sale of virtually all of their
assets to another company.
How did you extricate yourself from this situation?
Fortunately, part of our deal was secured, placing us first in line in the
bankruptcy proceedings. We have already recovered a large chunk of
our capital and have a claim pending for more. If our due diligence is
done correctly, then the companies we invest in should have signifi-
cant liquidation value, which was the case here—the acquiring com-
pany wrote a check for more than $100 million. Of course, although
the assets are there, we don't know how much more money, if any, we
will recover on our claim.
What did you learn from this whole experience?
The fact that the company negotiated aggressively for granting us less
protection than is the case for our normal deals should have acted as
a warning signal. The blindsiding that came from the financial
restatement was really brutal, but I don't know how that could have
been avoided.
You've grown from a one-man shop to a thirty-plus-person firm.
What have you learned about the process of hiring people since
you started your company?
One of the best things I learned since starting a business was how to
hire the right people. I used to hire anyone who insisted they were
right for the job. If we had an open slot and someone said, "No prob-
lem, I could do that job," I would hire that person because I knew that
if / said that, I could do it. Through experience I learned that most
people who try to aggressively talk their way into a position can't do
the job.
J N I N - W I N I N V E S T I N G
What have you changed in your hiring practices?
The people who have worked out best are the people that I had done
business with successfully for years before I recruited them to join us.
Literally, I went after them; they didn't come after me. That's been
the big difference.
Fletcher's initial success came from a brilliant insight: Even if the
markets are efficient, if different investors are treated differently, it
implies a profit opportunity. Every strategy he has employed, at its
core, has been based on a discrepancy in the treatment of different
parties. For example, the profit opportunities in his current primary
strategy—private equity funding—are made possible by the fact that
some companies have much greater difficulty attracting investment
funds than other companies with equivalent long-term fundamen-
tals. By identifying these temporarily out-of-favor companies,
Fletcher can structure a financing deal that offers these firms funds
at a lower cost than they can find elsewhere while at the same time
providing him with a high-probability, low-risk profit opportunity.
The two other main themes to Fletcher's trading success are
innovation and risk control. Although the specifics of Fletcher's
approach are not directly applicable to ordinary investors, these two
principles still represent worthy goals for all market participants.


--- PAGE 82 ---
AHMET OKUMUS
From Istanbul to
Wall Street Bull
When Ahmet OkumilS was sixteen years old, he visited the trading floor of the
recently opened Istanbul Stock Exchange and was mesmerized. He was
fascinated by trading, which on the Istanbul exchange resembled specu-
lating far more closely than investing. It wasn't long before his initial
enthusiasm became an obsession, and he began cutting classes regularly
to trade stocks on the exchange.
Okumus knew that he wanted to become a money manager and real-
ized that the country that offered the greatest opportunity for achieving
his goal was the United States. In 1989, he immigrated to the United
States, ostensibly to attend college but with the firm conviction that this
was just a stepping-stone to his true career objective. Using a $15,000
stake from his mother, Okumus began trading U.S. stocks in 1992. This
original investment had mushroomed to over $6 million by early 2000, an
average annual compounded return of 107% (gross returns). In 1997, he
launched his first hedge fund, the Okumus Opportunity Fund.
I interviewed Okumus at his Manhattan office, a distinctly unimpres-
sive space. Coming off the elevator, I was greeted by a receptionist who
did not work for Okumus but who clearly was shared by all the tenants
on the floor. Okumus's office was small, badly in need of a paint job, and
outfitted with ugly furniture. The single window offered little visual
relief, providing a claustrophobic view of the side of the adjacent build-
ing. The office had one redeeming feature: it was cheap—actually, free (a
perk for commission business). Okumus is evidently proud of this. Talk-
ing about how he got great deals on everything from his office space to
148
F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L
his accountant, he says, "It's my nature. I love to get good deals. I don't
pay up." It is a comment that is equally fitting as a description of his trad-
ing philosophy.
At the time of my interview, Okumus shared his small office with his
college buddy, Ted Coakley III, whom he brought in to do marketing and
assorted administrative tasks. (A subsequent expansion in staff necessi-
tated a move to larger quarters.) Coakley's faith in Okumus is based on
personal experience. In college, he was Okumus's first investor, giving
him $1,000 to invest (in two $500 installments)—an investment that
grew to over $120,000 in seven years.
Prior to 1998, Okumus's worst year was a gain of 61 percent (gross
return). In 1998, a year when the S&P rose by 28 percent, he finished
the year with only a minuscule 5 percent gain. I began my mid-1999
interview by questioning him about his uncharacteristically lackluster
performance in 1998.
What happened last year?
It all happened in December. At the start of the month, 1 was up 30
percent for the year. I thought the rise in Internet stocks was a
mania. Valuations had risen to levels we had never seen before. For
example, Schwab has been publicly traded for over ten years. At the
time I went short, the ratios of the stock price to the valuation
measures—sales per share, earnings per share, cash flow [earnings
plus depreciation and amortization] per share, book value per
share—were higher than they had ever been before. [As he talks
about these events, the pain of the experience is still very evident in
his voice.]
What levels were these ratios at?
As an example, the price/earnings ratio was at 54 to 1. In comparison,
at prior price peaks in the stock, the ratio had been anywhere from 20
to 1, to 35 to 1.
The valuation measures were at record highs and getting higher
all the time. What made you decide to go short at that particular
juncture?


--- PAGE 83 ---
AHMIT O K U M U S
Insiders [company management] were selling heavily. In Schwab,
insiders always sell, but in this instance, the insider sales were partic-
ularly high.
Out of curiosity, why are insiders always net sellers in Schwab?
Because the company issued a lot of options to management, which
get exercised over time.
What happened after you went short?
The stock went up 34 percent in one week and was still going up
when I finally covered my position.
What other Internet or Internet-related stocks did you short in
December 1998?
Amazon.
How can you even evaluate a company like Amazon, which has
no earnings and therefore an infinite price/earnings ratio?
You can't evaluate it in any conventional sense. However, I had an
idea of what price it shouldn't be, and Amazon was at that level.
When I went short, Amazon's capitalization [the share price multi-
plied by the number of shares outstanding] was $17 billion, which
made it equivalent to the fourth largest retailer in the United States.
This seemed absurd to me.
Also, book sales fall off sharply during the first quarter following
the heavy Christmas season sales. I thought the prospect of lower
sales in the next quarter would cause the stock to weaken. When I
went short, Amazon was up ninefold during the prior year and four-
fold during the previous two months.
At what price was Amazon trading when you went short?
I didn't actually go short. I sold out-of-the-money call options. [In this
transaction, the option seller collects a premium in exchange for
accepting the obligation to sell the stock at a specific price above the
market price.*] Since the options I sold were way out-of-the-money,
the market could still go up a lot, and I wouldn't lose. I thought I
might be wrong and the stock could go up some more, but I didn't
think the stock would go up that much.
* Readers unfamiliar with options may find it useful to consult the short primer on
options in the appendix.
F R O M I S T A N B U L T<LflH,L S T R E E T B U L L
What was the strike price of the options you sold?* Where was
the market at the time?
The stock was trading around 220, and I sold the 250 calls. The stock
could go up another 30 points before I lost any money on the trade.
How much did you sell the options for?
I sold them for 1 Vs, but there were only three days left until expira-
tion. I figured the stock was not going to go up 15 percent in three
days. The day after I went short, one of the prominent analysts for the
stock revised his price projection, which had already been surpassed
by the market, from $150 to $400. Overnight, the stock moved from
220 to 260, and one day later it nearly reached 300. The options I had
sold for I'/s were selling for 48. [Options trade in 100-share units.
Therefore, each option he had sold for $112 was now worth $4,800.]
How much did you lose on that trade?
The trade killed me. Amazon cost me 1 7 percent of my equity, and
Schwab cost me another 12 percent.
Had you used this type of strategy before—selling out-of-the-
money calls?
Sure, but these types of price moves were totally unprecedented.
There are a lot of Internet stocks that are up twenty- or thirtyfold dur-
ing the past year, but I'm not touching them. I'm just sticking to what
I know best: fundamentals and value.
What lesson did you learn from this entire experience?
Not to short Internet stocks [he laughs}.
Any broader lessons?
Don't get involved when there is too much mania. Just stick to things
that have some predictability. You can't forecast mania. If a stock that
should be selling at 10 is trading at 100, who is to say it can't go to 500.
What was your emotional state during this entire experience?
The funny thing is that I was already upset at the start of December
because the year was almost over, and I was up only 25 percent, which
was my worst year ever. After I took the loss on Schwab and Amazon
*The strike price is the price at which the option buyers could buy the stock by exercis-
ing their options. Of course, they would exercise their options only if the market
price was above the strike price at the time of the option expiration.


--- PAGE 84 ---
and was barely up for the year, I was devastated. I remember going to
Bloomingdale's with my girlfriend and not being able to stay in the
store because every time I saw a price sign, it reminded me of the
stock market. After ten minutes, I just had to leave. For about a week
after I got out of these trades, I couldn't look at the Investor's Business
Daily section that showed how the market was doing to date.
Was this your worst emotional experience in the market?
Absolutely. It was by far the worst experience; I had never felt like
that before.
But when I look at your track record, I see that December 1998,
when you lost 16 percent, was only your second worst month and
was far eclipsed by August 1998, when you lost a staggering 53
percent. How come August 1998, which seems so much worse on
paper, doesn't register on your emotional barometer?
The reason my August 1998 decline was so large was that I was
caught 200 percent long during the month's big stock market decline.
Even though I was down much more during August, I was confident
in the fundamentals of my stocks. They were just selling at ridicu-
lously low valuations. The price/earnings ratio of my portfolio was
only 5. Some of the stocks I was long were even selling below net
cash—you never see that. I knew the stocks I held were absolute bar-
gains and that they couldn't stay that low for long. I wasn't worried
about their going down much further. In contrast, in December I lost
money because I was short Internet stocks, and there was no way to
know when they would stop going up.
So the difference between August and December was your confi-
dence level: In August you felt completely confident, even
though you lost much more, and in December you felt out of
control.
Exactly.
Even though you recovered August's entire huge loss in only two
months, do you consider it a mistake to have put yourself in a
position of being 200 percent long during a bear market?
Yes. This led to one of the three changes I made to my trading rules at
the start of 1999. The first, which we discussed before, was don't par-
ticipate in mania. The second was never to have more than a 100 per-
cent net position, either long or short. [In August 1998 Okumus had
been 200 percent long and 0 percent short, or 200 percent net long.]
What was the third change in your trading rules?
I started using options for the specific purpose of reducing downside
volatility.
Was this change a response to investor feedback? Were some of
the investors who were impressed by your net returns scared off
by the volatility in your returns, especially the 53 percent
decline in August 1998?
Yes, the rule changes I made were definitely influenced by investor
feedback. Investors told us that they didn't want month-to-month
volatility. Consequently, I started focusing much more on month-to-
month performance. Before, when I was managing money for only
myself, my family, and a few clients, my sole goal was long-term capi-
tal appreciation. It was as if I were running a marathon and only con-
cerned about my finish time; I didn't care about the individual split
times. Now that I am managing much more money for investors who
are concerned about the monthly numbers, it's as though I'm running
a marathon, but everyone is paying attention to every hundred
meters. As a result, even though my main goal is still long-term capi-
tal appreciation, I'm focusing a lot more on the monthly numbers
because I want to grow the fund much larger.
How did you first get involved in the stock market?
I was always interested in finance and currencies. As a kid, I would
read the sports page of the newspaper, just like my friends, but 1 also
read the financial page. In 1986, they opened the Istanbul Stock
Exchange. The newspapers didn't even have a stock market column
until 1987. When they did start reporting stock prices, I noticed that
the prices changed every day. It got my attention. I figured if you were
smart, you could make money off of this because there had to be a
reason why prices were changing.
At first, I just followed prices in the paper. Then I realized that the
stock exchange was close to my school. One day, I skipped school to
go down to the exchange and see how it worked.


--- PAGE 85 ---
Describe the Istanbul Stock Exchange.
It's completely modernized now, but at the time there was a bar
across the middle of the room, which separated the spectators from
the floor brokers. In the front of the room there were boards with bid
and asked prices for each stock.
How many stocks were traded on the exchange at the time?
About thirty.
Was there one floor broker for each stock?
No, the floor brokers worked for different brokerage firms; they could
all trade in any stock.
How did you interact with the broker if you wanted to buy or sell
a stock?
You would yell, "Hey, come here."
How big was the exchange?
Oh, about ten times bigger than this office [translation: extremely
small].
How long did you watch the market before you made your first
trade?
I watched it for a few weeks. One of the stocks, a construction com-
pany, which I knew was constantly getting new contracts, went down
almost every day. This didn't make any sense to me, so I decided to
buy some shares. The broker warned me not to buy the stock, assur-
ing me that it was headed lower. But I bought the stock anyway
because I knew it was a good company. Within two weeks after I
bought it, the stock doubled. That experience really got me hooked. I
said to myself that logic works. I realized that stocks moved for a rea-
son, and I was determined to find the reason.
At the time, there was no market research whatsoever. I started
doing my own research. The Istanbul Stock Exchange published
sheets that showed current and previous year revenues, earnings,
debt, and a few other statistics. No one paid any attention to these
numbers. Since there were no books or articles available on the stock
market, I just tried to interpret the statistics logically.
For example, if a company made $20 profits for every $100 in
sales, I assumed it was a good company; if it only made $2 profits on
every $100, I figured it wasn't so hot. I looked at the shares outstand-
F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L
ing and the amount of profits, and I calculated what I thought the
stock should be selling at. In effect, I created the price/earnings ratio
for myself. When I came to the United States to attend college, I dis-
covered that the price/earnings ratio and the other statistics I was
looking at were the basic data people used to analyze stocks.
Did you continue to be net profitable after your first winning
trade?
I did pretty well. Within a year or so, the people at the brokerage firm
I was using started listening to me for advice. During this time, the
stock market in Turkey went down from 900 to 350 and then back to
900. During the big decline, I managed to more than hold my own,
and then when the market went back up, I did very well.
How were you able to make even a small profit during the phase
when the stock market was going down sharply?
The stock market in Turkey is very speculative. The exchange has a 10
percent daily price limit. [The maximum permissible daily price move
(up or down) in each stock was limited to 10 percent. Typically, when
a market reaches limit up, trading will virtually cease, as there will be
many buyers, but few sellers. An analogous situation would apply
when the market is limit down.] Daily price limits are very common. I
had a rule that I would buy a stock if it went down the daily limit three
days in a row and then sell it on the first short-term bounce.
In other words, you were taking advantage of speculative
excesses. Do you still trade that way?
No, I trade on the fundamentals.
Say you select a stock because you like the fundamentals. How
do you decide when to begin buying it? Do you still wait for a
sharp sell-off before you buy it?
Not necessarily. I have an idea of the value of the stock in my head,
and when the stock goes low enough relative to that price, I'll buy it.
For example, say I believe a stock has a value of $35. In order to give
myself a wide margin of safety, I might buy it if it goes down to $20.
Do you always wait for the stock to reach your price before you
buy it?
Definitely. I am never in a rush. I wait patiently until the stock gets to
my number.


--- PAGE 86 ---
A H M E T O K U M U S
Using that approach, I assume you miss a lot of stocks.
Certainly, but my main goal is to make money on every investment,
not necessarily to catch every trade. I don't have to make a lot on each
trade, as long as I make something. Since 1992, 90 percent of my
trades have been winners.
What percent of the stocks you research and decide to buy actu-
ally come down to your price?
Not many, maybe 10 to 20 percent. I follow what the other value
managers in the industry are doing, and I know why they buy the
stocks they do. I'm much stricter on my entries than they are. They
may be willing to buy a company at sixteen times earnings, whereas
I'm not willing to pay more than twelve. "Buy low and sell high" is
something a lot of people say but very few people do. I actually do it.
When did you come to the United States?
I came here in 1989 to attend college. The funny thing is that when I
came to the United States, the Turkish stock market, which had gone
from 900 to 350 and back to 900 while I was trading it, went from
900 to 4,000 in six months. I was very upset.
Did you come just to attend college, or did you have any
thoughts of trying to stay permanently?
My intention from the very beginning was to become a fund manager
in the United States. This is the biggest market, and in the United
States the sky is the limit, whereas in Turkey, the opportunity is very
limited.
Did you ever look at the United States stock market before you
came here?
No, but from the first day I arrived in the United States, I started to
focus on the U.S. stock market. I wanted to learn what made stocks
move.
How did you start?
By reading as much as I could.
WTiat books did you find most beneficial or influential?
I very much liked Stock Market Logic by Norman Fosback. For one
thing, that book taught me to focus on insider trading [buying and
selling by a company's senior management and board of directors],
F.ROM I S T A N B U L - 7 0 W A L L S T R E E T B U L L
which has become an important element in my approach. I also
found books on Warren Buffet's methodology very useful.
What aspect of Warren Buffet's methodology appealed to you?
The concept of determining a stock's value and then buying it at a dis-
count to that number in order to allow for a margin of safety.
What other books did you find useful?
One Up on Wall Street by Peter Lynch gave me an appreciation of the
importance of common sense in stock investing. Peter Lynch also
pointed out that your odds in a stock are much better if there is sig-
nificant insider buying.
How do you measure whether insider buying is significant?
I compare the amount of stock someone buys with his net worth and
salary. For example, if the amount he buys is more than his annual
salary, I consider that significant.
So you're looking at a breakdown of insider buying statistics, not
just the total numbers.
I am very detailed. I don't think there is one other person who is more
focused on insider activity than I am.
What else is important in interpreting insider trading activity?
You have to make sure that insider buying represents purchases of
new shares, not the exercise of options.
Is insider buying an absolute prerequisite, or will you sometimes
buy a stock you like that reaches your entry price target, even if
there is no insider buying?
Most of the time I won't. I want to see the insiders putting their
money in their own company. Of course, if management already owns
a significant portion of the company, they don't have to buy more. For
example, insiders already own about 65 percent of the shares in J. D.
Edwards—a stock I currently like—so I don't need to see any addi-
tional buying. In contrast, in some companies, insiders only own
about 1 percent of the firm. In companies with low insider owner-
ship, management's primary motivation will be job security and
higher bonuses, not a higher stock price.
Do you do your research by computer or manually?
Manually. I think that's the best way because you learn much more.


--- PAGE 87 ---
0 K U M U Si
What is the universe of stocks that you are following?
Anything on the Big Board and Nasdaq.
How many stocks is that, roughly?
About ten thousand.
How can you possibly do research on ten thousand stocks manu-
ally?
I spend a hundred hours a week on research. I follow all the stocks
that I have researched at one time or another during the past eleven
years, which is a substantial number. I also pay close attention to
stocks making new fifty-two-week lows. A good company that I've
identified from previous research does not have to make a new low for
me to get interested. If it is down a lot, even if it doesn't hit a new low,
I'm on it.
How are you aware of all the stocks that have witnessed signifi-
cant declines?
Besides looking at the list of new fifty-two-week lows, the Daily
Graphs chart book contains about half the stocks I follow, and I
review it weekly to see which stocks have declined a lot.
So you're always looking at stocks that have done poorly.
Always. I usually don't even consider buying a stock unless it's down
60 or 70 percent from its high. In the seven years I have traded U.S.
stocks, I have never owned a stock that made a new high. I think that
must be a pretty unusual statement.
Are you implying that when you flip through the charts, you only
pay attention to stocks that have been moving down?
That's correct, with one exception: If the stock has been moving
sideways and the earnings have been moving up, I might pay atten-
tion.
Then are all the stocks you buy at or near recent lows?
Not all. If it's a company that 1 know well and the fundamentals are
very strong, I might go long, even if the stock is significantly above its
low. For example, Microchip Technology is currently at $35, which is
well below its high of $50, but also well above last year's low of $15.
Even though it's well off its low, I'm still selling puts in the stock
because their business is improving tremendously.
F R O M I S T A N B U L TWflLl S T R E E T B U L L
Selling puts represents a bullish position. The seller of a put
receives a premium for the obligation to buy a stock at a price called
the strike price during the life span of the option. This obligation is
activated if the option is exercised by the buyer, which will happen if
the stock price is below the strike price at the option expiration.
For example, assume that a stock is trading at $13 and that a put
option on the stock with a $10 strike price is trading at $1. If the
stock is trading above $10 when the option expires, the seller will
have a $1 profit per share (a $100 profit per option contract, which
represents 100 shares). If the stock is trading below $10 at the option
expiration, the option will presumably be exercised, and the seller of
the option will be required to buy the stock at $ 10, no matter how low
the stock is trading.
Okumus, who typically sells puts with strike prices below the cur-
rent market price (called out-of-the-money puts), will earn a profit
equal to the option premium paid by the option buyer if the stock
declines modestly, remains unchanged, or goes up. However, if the
stock declines by a wide margin, he will be obligated to buy the stock
at an above-market price (the strike price) at the time of the option
expiration.
What motivates you to sell puts in a stock instead of just buying
the stock?
Any stock that I sell a put on, I am happy if they put me the stock
[exercise the put option, requiring Okumus to buy the stock at the
strike price]. I don't sell a put on a stock unless I would be happy to
own the stock at the strike price.
For example, I'm currently short some $10 puts on J. D. Edwards,
which is trading near $13. I hope they put me the stock because I
would love to own it at $ 10. If they do, I'll still have the premium, and
if I buy the stock at $ 10, I know I will make money.
But most of the time when I sell puts, the market never declines
enough for the option to be exercised. This, of course, is okay too
because I still keep the premium as a profit.


--- PAGE 88 ---
In other words, selling put options is an alternative way for you
to be buying stocks. If it doesn't go down to the strike price, you
still earn the premium, and if does go down to the strike price,
that's also fine because that's the price you would have bought
the stock at anyway.
Exactly. By selling puts, I am getting paid by the market while I'm
waiting for the stock to come down to my price. Also, for some stocks,
it may only be possible to make money by selling puts as opposed to
buying the stock.
For example, value stocks have been very much out of favor in
recent years. There are stocks that are trading at only five to six times
earnings. The earnings are growing, insiders are buying, and the
stocks are just sitting there. At the same time, the S&P is going up
like crazy. You can't make money by buying these stocks, but you can
by selling the puts. If you sell put options, you don't have to be right
about the stock going up; all you need in order to make money is for
the stock not to go down by much.
Let's say that there is a stock trading at 35, and you decide you
would like to be a buyer at 30. Why not always sell the 30 put
and collect the premium, since if it went to 30, you would buy it
anyway? This way, you would always make the premium as a
profit, whether the stock went down to 30 or not.
Because you always have to consider your opportunity costs. If I sell
puts, I need to put up margin against the position. Sometimes the
premium I could collect for selling the put wouldn't justify tying up
the money needed for the position. I could do better investing that
money elsewhere.
Let's go back to when you arrived in the United States. You said
earlier that you started researching the U.S. stock market when
you first came here, which also approximately coincided with the
beginning of college. How did you allocate your time between
studying for college and studying the stock market?
On average I would say 35 percent school and 65 percent stock mar-
ket, but the stock market percentage kept going up over time. By the
beginning of my senior year, I was devoting 90 percent of my time to
the stock market, and I quit school altogether.
F R O M ISTANBULHPlBiiL ST.SiET B U L L
Weren't you at all reluctant about quitting college a year before
you were going to get your degree?
No, because I just couldn't wait to get started. Also, I was a finance
major, and my teachers knew a lot less than I did about the stock mar-
ket and investing.
What did they teach you in college about the stock market?
They teach you theories, and theories don't work most of the
time.
For example?
The efficient market hypothesis [the concept that the market imme-
diately discounts all known information], which in my opinion is
ridiculous.
Why is it ridiculous?
Because different market participants will do research of varying qual-
ity. The market price will reflect the average assessment of all
investors. If you can do research that most other people do not, you
might be able to discover something that most of the rest of the mar-
ket doesn't know and benefit from that knowledge. There are a lot of
things that I know about my companies that most other investors
don't. Therefore, my evaluation of these companies is not going to be
the same as theirs. Why then should a stock always trade at the right
price level?
When you buy a stock, do you know where you want to get out
before you get in?
Certainly. I always have a target price at which I will get out, assum-
ing the fundamentals haven't changed. If the fundamentals get
stronger, however, I might raise my target.
What is this target based on? Is it some specified percent gain?
Yes, a percent gain.
What percent?
It depends how cheaply I buy the stock, but on average 20 to 25
percent.
What you are doing sounds like the exact opposite of Peter
Lynch, who says you should go for a "ten-bagger" [buy stocks that
you think can increase tenfold]; you're not even going for a dou-
ble, or even close to it.


--- PAGE 89 ---
1 never go for home runs. That's why I. should do well in a bear
market.
I assume that when you sell a stock, you look to buy it back when
it dips.
Certainly, as long as the fundamentals don't change.
But don't you often find yourself taking a moderate profit on a
stock, and then the stock never dips enough to give you a chance
to repurchase it?
That happens a lot of time, but I don't worry about it. My main goal is
not to lose money. If you can make money consistently, you will do
just fine.
Most of your trading history has been with a small amount of
money. Now that you have started a fund and are doing well, that
amount will increase dramatically. How will trading much larger
sums of money affect your approach?
It won't change anything. The stocks I buy are all well-known names
with lots of liquidity. This is deliberate. When I first started, my atti-
tude was that I had to think big. Therefore I made sure to adopt a
style that could be used with much larger sums of money.
The period during which you have traded has coincided with one
of the greatest bull markets in history. What happens to your
approach if we go into a major bear market?
I hope we get a bear market. All the momentum players will get killed;
all the Internet players will get killed; all the growth players will get
killed; the value players, however, will do okay. The companies that I
buy are already in bear markets. They are trading at five to six times
earnings. They don't have room to go much lower. Remember, the
stocks that I buy are already down 60 to 70 percent from their highs.
Okay, I could see why you would lose a lot less in a bear market
than investors using other approaches. But if the S&P index
comes off 20 or 30 percent, I would assume that your stocks
would go down as well.
That's fine, I'll just hold. I know the value of my companies. I don't
second-guess myself when 1 make an investment. A lot of other
money managers have rules about getting out of their stocks if they go
down by some specified amount, say 7 percent or 10 percent. They
F R O M I S T A N B U L TO 
S T R E E T B U L L
have to do that because they are not sure about what they are buying.
I do tremendous research on any stock that I buy, and I know how
much it is worth. In fact, if a stock I buy goes down 10 percent and
the fundamentals haven't changed, 1 might well buy more.
But if you never use any stop-loss points, what happens if a com-
pany you buy goes bankrupt? How much of an impact would an
event like that have on your portfolio?
It will never happen. I don't buy any companies that have even a
remote chance of going bankrupt. I buy companies that have a good
balance sheet, a high book value, consistent business track records,
good management, and large insider buying ownership. These are not
the type of companies that go bankrupt.
How do you know when you are wrong in a position?
If tbe fundamentals change and the stock no longer meets my criteria
for holding it at the current price.
What if the price is going against you, but the fundamentals
haven't changed?
Then I will just buy more.
How many different stock positions do you typically hold at one
time?
About ten. Simple logic: My top ten ideas will always perform better
than my top hundred.
What is the maximum amount of your portfolio that you would
allocate to a single stock?
At this point, the maximum I would hold on any single stock is about
30 percent of the portfolio. It used to be as high as 70 percent.
That sounds like an extremely large maximum position on one
stock. What happens if you are wrong on that trade?
I make sure that I know the fundamentals and that I am not wrong.
But there may be some reason for a stock going down that you
don't know about.
No.
How can you say no for sure?
Because I know the companies I buy. For example, if I buy Viasoft at
$7, a company that has $5 per share in cash and no debt, what is my
downside—$2?


--- PAGE 90 ---
A H M E T O K U M U S
What is your approach on the short side?
I look for stocks that are trading at a huge multiple to earnings. How-
ever, after my experience with Internet stocks last year, I've added a
rule that there has to be a catalyst. Now, regardless of how extremely
overvalued a stock may be, I won't sell it until there has been a cata-
lyst for change.
So another mistake you made in shorting Amazon and Schwab
last year, besides selling into a mania, was selling without a cata-
lyst.
Exactly. Even though those stocks may be overvalued, the direction of
the fundamentals is still strong. Although Amazon is not making any
money, they continue to grow their revenues and meet their sales tar-
gets. As long as this is the case, the market is not going to sell the
stock off sharply.
It seems it would be very difficult for you to apply your method-
ology to the short side. On the long side, you are buying stocks
that have already declined sharply and are trading at prices
that represent strong value. In other words, you are buying at a
point where your risk exposure is relatively low. In contrast,
when you are shorting a stock, no matter how high you sell it at,
there is always an open-ended risk, which is the exact opposite
of your buying approach. How can you even approach the short
side?
I make sure that the fundamentals are broken before I go short. Even
if Schwab today were trading at a hundred times earning, I wouldn't
short it as long as the trend in the fundamentals was still improving. 1
would wait for the fundamentals to start deteriorating.
But you might get another mania that drives the stock higher,
even though the fundamentals are deteriorating.
Once the fundamentals get broken, market manias get broken as
well. For example, there was a mania in Iomega a few years ago. Once
the fundamentals started to break down, the mania ended.
But how do you deal with the problem of unlimited risk?
All my longs are long-term investments, but my shorts are usually
short-term precisely because of the danger of unlimited risk.
F R O M I S T A N B U L TOJJU S T R E E T B U L L
How would you rate the quality of Wall Street research?
Not very good.
For what reason?
Most analysts don't have a logical reason why a stock should be at a
given price. As long as the company does well, they don't care what
the price is. Typically, if a stock reaches their target, they will just
raise the target, even though the fundamentals haven't changed.
We have seen an incredible bull market during the 1990s. Is the
magnitude of this advance justified by the fundamentals?
For two reasons I think we are witnessing the biggest financial mania
ever in the stock market. First, the stock market price/earnings ratio
is at a record high level. Second, the average profit margin of compa-
nies is at its highest level ever.
What do you mean by profit margin?
The amount of profit per sales. For example, if the profit margin is 20,
it means the company is making $20 in profits for every $ 100 in sales.
Why then is a high profit margin a negative?
Because there is virtually no room for further improvement.
What do you read?
Everything, including financial newspapers and magazines, tons of
company reports, and all sorts of trade journals. The trade periodicals
I read depend on my existing and prospective positions. For example,
last year I owned a company that was making products for urinary dis-
orders, so 1 read Urinary Times.
What is the specific checklist you use before buying a stock?
The stock must meet the following criteria:
1. The company has a good track record in terms of growing their earn-
ings per share, revenues per share, and cash flow per share.
2. The company has an attractive book value [the theoretical value of a
share if all the company's assets were liquidated and its liabilities paid
off] and a high return on equity.
3. The stock is down sharply, often trading near its recent low. But this
weakness has to be due to a short-term reason while the long-term
fundamentals still remain sound.
4. There is significant insider buying or ownership.


--- PAGE 91 ---
5. Sometimes a company having a new management team with a good
track record of turning companies around may provide an additional
reason to buy the stock.
What are the trading rules you live by?
> Do your research and he sure you know the companies that you are
buying.
&» 
Buy low.
> Re disciplined, and don't get emotionally involved.
What are your goals?
My goal is to be the best money manager in the industry. After the
fund reaches its ten-year anniversary, I hope to have the best track
record for the prior ten years, nine years, all the way down to five
years. Anything shorter than five years could indicate someone who
is just lucky or using a style that is temporarily in favor with the
market.
Okumus has developed a trading style that assures he will miss 80
to 90 percent of the winning stocks he identifies and typically realize
only a small portion of the advance in the stocks he does buy. He also
brags that he has never owned a stock that has made a new high.
These hardly sound like characteristics of a great trading approach.
Yet these seeming flaws are actually essential elements of his suc-
cess. Okumus has only one overriding goal: to select individual
trades that will have a very high probability of gain and a very low
level of risk. To achieve this goal he has to be willing to forgo many
winners and leave lots of money on the table. This is fine with Oku-
mus. His approach has resulted in over 90 percent profitable trades
and a triple-digit average annual return.
Okumus's bread-and-butter trade is buying a stock with sound
fundamentals at a bargain price. He looks for stocks with good
growth in earnings, revenues, and cash flow, and significant insider
buying or ownership. Strong fundamentals, however, are only half
the picture. A stock must also be very attractively priced. Typically,
the stocks Okumus buys have declined 60 percent or more off their
F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L
highs and are trading at price/earnings ratios under 12. He also
prefers to buy stocks with prices as close as possible to book value.
Very few stocks meet Okumus's combination of fundamental and
price criteria. The majority of the stocks that fulfil] his fundamental
requirements never decline to his buying price. Out of the universe
of ten thousand stocks Okumus surveys, he holds only about ten in
his portfolio at any given time.
One element of market success frequently cited by Market Wiz-
ards, both in this volume and its two predecessors, is the age-old
trading adage: Cut your losses short. Yet Okumus's methodology
seems to fly in the face of this conventional wisdom. Okumus does
not believe in liquidating a stock position because it shows a loss. In
fact, if a stock he buys moves lower, he may even buy more. How can
Okumus be successful by doing the exact opposite of what so many
other great traders advise?
There is no paradox. There are many roads to trading success,
although none are particularly easy to find or to stay on. Cutting
losses is important only because it is a means of risk control. While
all successful traders incorporate risk control into their methodology,
not all use cutting losses to achieve risk control. Okumus attains risk
control by using an extremely restrictive stock selection process: He
buys only financially sound companies that have already declined by
well over 50 percent from their highs. He has extreme confidence
that the stocks he buys have very low risk at the time he buys them.
To achieve this degree of certainty, Okumus passes up many prof-
itable trading opportunities. But because he is so rigorous in his
stock selection, he is able to achieve risk control without employing
the principle of cutting losses short.
One technique Okumus uses to enhance his performance is the
sale of out-of-the-money puts on stocks he wishes to own. He sells
puts at a strike price at which he would buy the stock anyway. In this
way, he at least makes some profit if the stock fails to decline to his
buying point and reduces his cost for the stock by the option pre-
mium received if it does reach his purchase price.
Okumus is very disciplined and patient. If there are very few


--- PAGE 92 ---
stocks that meet his highly selective conditions, he will wait until
such opportunities arise. For example, at the end of the second
quarter in 1999, Okumus was only 13 percent invested because,
as he stated at the time, "There are no bargains around. I'm not
risking the money I'm investing until I find stocks that are very
cheap."
MARK MINERVINI
Stock Around the Clock
Minervini comes Off as a bit cocky, not because he thinks he's better than the
markets—in fact, his respect for the markets and an appreciation of his
own fallibility underlie his whole trading philosophy—but rather in the
sense that he feels he is better than most of his peers. And, frankly, if he
can even remotely continue to match his spectacular performance of the
past five years in corning years, then this conceit may not be misplaced. I
sensed that he took particular pleasure in the knowledge that as a self-
taught dropout (from junior high school no less!) he has run circles
around most Ph.D.s trying to design systems to beat the market.
After dropping out of school, Minervini supported himself as a drum-
mer. Trying to get Minervini to talk about his early experiences as a musi-
cian was a futile and frustrating effort. Despite my repeated entreaties
that a discussion of a trader's background was essential in giving an inter-
view some color and life, he seemed intent on not providing any details
about his career as a drummer. I had the distinct impression that his
responses were being guided by the hand of an unseen publicist. He
either gave the most general of answers or somehow managed to divert the
discussion back to the stock market. Sample question (asked with growing
weariness): "Is there anything at all with any specificity that you can tell me
about your experiences as a musician? Answer: "I was attracted to music
because I liked the freedom, which is what attracted me to the stock mar-
ket. . . ." Finally, after much prodding, he summarily acknowledged that
he played for several bands, cut a record, appeared on an MTV video,
worked as a studio musician, and owned his own studio. End of story.
Minervini became interested in the stock market in the early 1980s
169


--- PAGE 93 ---
M A R K
while still in his teens. His early dabbling soon grew into a full-time
obsession. He sold his studio and used the proceeds to stake his trading.
Initially, he lost everything—an experience he describes in the interview.
He realized that his worst mistake had been depending on others for
advice, so he embarked on an intensive program of self-education and
research.
After nearly a decade of research and market experience, Minervini
developed a well-defined trading methodology. In mid-1994, confident
that his trading approach was sufficiently refined, and encouraged by his
steadily improving performance, Minervini consolidated his various
accounts into a single account that was to become his track record. (Pre-
viously, he maintained several accounts, partially to facilitate comparing
different strategies.) In the five and a half years since initiating this
account, Minervini's performance has been nothing short of astounding.
His average annual compounded return during the period has been a
towering 220 percent, including his 155 percent first place finish in the
1997 U.S. Investing Championship. Most traders and money managers
would be delighted to have Minervini's worst year during this span—a
128 percent gain—as their best year. But return is only half the story.
Amazingly, Minervini achieved his lofty gains while keeping his risk very
low: He had only one down quarter— barely—a loss of a fraction of 1
percent.
Minervini launched his own hedge fund, the Quantech Fund, LP, in
2000. He is also president of the Quantech Research Group, an institu-
tional research firm that provides stock selections based on Minervini's
proprietary selection methodology. Minervini spends his days managing
money and his nights running computer screens and scouring company
fundamentals.
I interviewed Minervini in his Midtown Manhattan office. The
interview was conducted over the course of two afternoons. Minervini
was clearly under the weather, acknowledging that he was running a
temperature of 103 degrees. He chose not to cancel our meetings,
however, because by his own admission, being interviewed in a Market
Wizard book was one of his lifetime goals. He was not about to let a
virus deter him from checking another item off his list of career objec-
tives.
S T O C K A R O U N D TiHi
When I arrived, Minervini was in his office, looking at a stock chart
on his computer screen and timing the entry of a trade. After hanging
up the phone he commented to me:
"I hope I don't get a good fill."
Come again?
A good fill is a death blow. The average investor who puts in a buy
order when the market is at 27 is thrilled if he gets a fill at 263/4. I
would probably just turn around and get out of the position. Stocks
that are ready to blast off are usually very difficult to buy without
pushing the market higher. If I put in an order for ten thousand at 27
and the floor comes back to me and says, "We can only do three thou-
sand at 27. The market is at 271/4. What do you want to do now?" it
reinforces my belief that the timing of the trade is right.
What was the motivation for the stock you just bought?
The motivation is always the same. Although I may hold the position
much longer, I am buying the stock because I think it will go up
within hours or at most days.
Yes, but what gives you that conviction?
You mean besides seventeen years of experience? The starting point is
a quantitative screen based on the characteristics of the stocks that
witnessed the largest and most rapid price advances during the past
century. A good book on this concept, which may be out of print, is
Superperformance Stocks by Richard Love.
What are some of the common denominators of stocks that share
this rapid price gain characteristic?
They tend to be less familiar names. More than 80 percent of the
stocks are less than ten years old. Although many of these stocks are
newer companies, I avoid low-priced stocks. Stocks that are low are
usually low for a reason. Typically, the stocks I buy are $20 or higher,
and I never buy stocks under $12. My basic philosophy is: Expose
your portfolio to the best stocks the market has to offer and cut your
losses very quickly when you're wrong. That one sentence essentially
describes my strategy.


--- PAGE 94 ---
M A R K
What are some of the other characteristics of the largest winning
stocks?
One thing that would surprise most people is that these stocks typi-
cally trade at above-average price/earnings (P/E) ratios, even before
they become big winners. Many investors limit their selections to
stocks with low P/E ratios. Unfortunately, avoiding stocks just because
the P/E seems "too high" will result in missing out on some of the
best market moves.
A protracted discussion followed wherein I asked specifics about Min-
ervini's trade selection process. His answers could be described most
kindly as general, and perhaps more accurately as evasive. Assuming that
the target market audience for this book is not insomniacs, I see little
purpose in repeating any of this conversation here. Finally, sensing that I
was finding his responses frustratingly ambiguous, he continued in a
measured tone.
Look, none of this is a black box. You have all these people trying
to come up with formulas to beat the market. The market is not a sci-
ence. The science may help increase the probabilities, but to excel
you need to master the art of trading.
People always want to know what's in my computer model. I think
that is the least relevant issue to successful trading. Of course you
need an edge, but there are a thousand ways to get an edge. Some
people use strategies that are completely opposite mine, yet we can
both be very profitable.
Developing your own strategy is what is important, not knowing
my strategy, which 1 have designed to fit my personality. Understand-
ing my trading philosophy, my principles, and my money management
techniques, that may be valuable. Besides, I think most people
overemphasize stock selection.
What do you mean?
I think people spend too much time trying to discover great entry
strategies and not enough time on money management. Assume you
took the top two hundred relative strength stocks [the two hundred
stocks that outperformed the market average by the greatest amount
STOCK A R O U N D THIS
during a specified number of past months] and placed the names on a
dart board. Then each day, you threw three darts and bought the
resulting stocks, and whenever any stock went down, say, 10 percent
from your entry level, you sold it instantaneously. I would be willing to
bet that you would make money because you are exposing yourself to
a group of stocks that is likely to contain some big potential winners
while at the same time you are cutting your losses.
You're not saying that if you took the entire list of stocks and
threw darts, you would make money as long as you cut your
losses at 10 percent. You're specifying that the list has to be pre-
selected in some way—in your example, the stocks with the high-
est relative strength.
I was only using an extreme example to illustrate a point: Containing
your losses is 90 percent of the battle, regardless of the strategy. In
addition, if you put yourself in a position to buy stocks that have the
potential to go up a lot, your odds will be better.
In other words, the odds will be better if you buy stronger stocks.
The odds will be better that you will buy stocks that go up a lot. Of
course, the odds may also be better that you will buy stocks that go
down a lot. But you don't have to worry about that—do you?—since
you are cutting your losses.
Then I assume that, as a general principle, you believe in the
idea of relative strength—buying stocks that have been going up
more than the market averages.
Or down less. One way to use relative strength is to look for stocks
that hold up well during a market correction and are the first to
rebound after the market comes off a relative low; these stocks are
the market leaders.
When you first started trading stocks, what method did you use
to select your buys?
[He laughs heartily at the recollection.] I didn't have any method. I
was buying low-priced stocks that were making new lows. I was also
taking tips from brokers.
Tell me about that.
The worst experience was in the early 1980s when my broker talked me
into buying a stock that was trading just under $20. The stock came


--- PAGE 95 ---
M A R K S
off about 4 or 5 points, and I was really concerned. He told me not to
worry. He assured me that the stock was a bargain and that the sell-off
was a once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunity. He claimed that the com-
pany had developed an AIDS drug that was going to get PDA approval.
He actually convinced me to buy more. The stock kept on sinking.
Eventually I couldn't buy any more because I ran out of money. The end
of the story is that the stock fell to under $1, and I lost all my money.
How much did you lose in that trade, and how much had you lost
up till that point?
Altogether, 1 lost about $30,000 to $40,000, with about half the
amount on that trade. Even worse, part of the loss was borrowed
money.
Did that experience cause you to lose any of your zeal for the
stock market?
No, but it was very upsetting and discouraging. I literally cried. What
hurt the most was that I thought 1 had lost my chance because I had
wiped out my trading stake. But no matter what happened, I never
stopped believing that there were great trading opportunities available
every day. It was just a matter of my figuring out how to identify them.
My mistake had been surrendering the decision-making responsibility
to someone else. I was convinced that if I did my own work, 1 would
be successful.
What gave you that conviction? It certainly wasn't your trading
results.
It's just my personality. I don't give up very easily. Perhaps the single
most important factor was that I had a great passion for the game. I
think almost anyone can be net profitable in the stock market given
enough time and effort, but to be a great trader, you have to have a
passion for it. You have to love trading. Michael Jordan didn't become
a great basketball player because he wanted to do product endorse-
ments. Van Gogh didn't become a great painter because he dreamed
that one day his paintings would sell for $50 million.
Was your passion for the market related to the opportunity to
make a lot of money?
Initially 1 might have been attracted to the stock market because of
the money, but once I got involved, making money was not the issue.
S T O C K A R O U N D THEXtOCK
What was the issue?
The issue was winning. The issue was being the best at something.
My goal is to be the best trader in the world. If you're the best, you
don't have to worry about money; it comes flying through the win-
dow.
What did you learn from your experience in losing all your
money?
I realized that no one was going to do it for me; I had to do it for
myself. My broker still got a commission, but I was sitting there
broke. Incidentally, although I didn't realize it then, I now fully
believe that losing all of your money is one of the best things that can
happen to a beginning trader.
Why?
Because it teaches you respect for the market. It is much better to
learn the lesson that you can lose everything when you don't have that
much money than to learn the same lesson later on.
I guess that implies you are not an advocate of paper trading for
beginners.
Absolutely. I think paper trading is the worst thing you can do. If you
are a beginner, trade with an amount of money that is small enough so
that you can afford to lose it, but large enough so that you will feel the
pain if you do. Otherwise, you're fooling yourself. I have news for you:
If you go from paper trading to real trading, you're going to make
totally different decisions because you're not used to being subjected
to the emotional pressure. Nothing is the same. It's like shadowbox-
ing and then getting in the ring with a professional boxer. What do
you think is going to happen? You're going to crawl up into a turtle
position and get the crap beat out of you because you're not used to
really getting hit. The most important thing to becoming a good trader
is to trade.
How did you make the transition from failure to success?
My results were transformed when I understood that what counts
isn't how often you're right, but how much you profit on your winning
trades versus how much you lose on your losing trades. On average,
I'm only profitable about 50 percent of the time, but I make much
more when I'm right than I lose when I'm wrong.


--- PAGE 96 ---
M A R K
I meant at the very beginning. How did you go from losing all
your money following a broker's tip to developing your own suc-
cessful methodology?
It was a slow, gradual process that took years of research and trading
experience. I also read just about every book I could find on the mar-
kets and successful individuals. Out of the hundreds of books that I
read, there were probably no more than ten that had a major influ-
ence on me. However, I don't think there is any such thing as a bad
book. Even if you only get one sentence out of a book, it's still worth-
while. Sometimes, one sentence can even change your life.
Okay, tell me a sentence that changed your life.
"The fruits of your success will be in direct ratio to the honesty and
sincerity of your own effort in keeping your own records, doing your
own thinking, and reaching your own conclusions." In other words,
take 100 percent responsibility for your results.
Which book is this quote taken from?
How to Trade in Stocks by Jesse Livermore.
What other lessons did you get out of that book?
There were many important messages. The basic message is not to
have a rigid opinion; the market is never wrong. He also talked about
the need for patience, not only in waiting for the right moment to
enter a position, but also in riding a gain in a winning position. The
message that really hit home with me was the importance of protect-
ing your profits, not just your principal.
What changed for you after reading Livermore's book?
I was astonished at how relevant the book still was to today's market.
It inspired me to go back and look at the stocks of the early 1900s and
even earlier. I found that there is really nothing different in the mar-
kets. I was amazed at how many of Livermore's observations matched
my own.
Such as?
The importance of money management.
Of course, Livermore himself didn't exactly excel in that depart-
ment. [Livermore made and lost several fortunes. He ultimately
committed suicide after wiping out one too many times.]
S T O C K A R O U N D THISCafiCK
On a day-to-day basis Livermore did cut his losses. Unfortunately,
from time to time he would let his urge to gamble get the better of
him. That urge is what destroys many traders.
What else helped you become a successful trader?
Playing poker. I think that anyone who wants to be a trader should
learn how to play poker.
Can you elaborate on that?
The first time I seriously watched a poker game in a casino I noticed
that the average winning hand was over $50, but that it only cost you
50 cents to see the first three cards. I couldn't believe that for half a
buck I could get a pretty good idea of my chances of winning a hun-
dred times that amount. If I folded fifty times and won only once, I
would still win twice as much as I lost. Those seemed like terrific
odds to me. That's how I got started playing poker. My strategy was to
play only super-high-probability hands.
Didn't everyone just fold once you played a hand?
No, and you know why?—because they were not disciplined, and
they wanted to play. The key is to know when to do nothing. Most
people, even if they have a winning strategy, will not follow it because
they lack discipline. For example, everyone knows how to lose
weight: you eat less fat and exercise. So why are most people over-
weight (assuming they don't have a medical problem)? Because they
lack discipline.
I guess the analogy to the markets is that when you put on a
trade, for a short while you get to see how it works out for lim-
ited risk. If it isn't working out, you take a small loss, and if it
goes in your favor, you have the potential for a large gain.
That's right. I have a saying: "Being wrong is acceptable, but staying
wrong is totally unacceptable." Being wrong isn't a choice, but staying
wrong is. To play any game successfully, you have to have some skill,
an edge, but beyond that it's money management. That's true whether
you're playing poker or investing. In either case, the key is managing
the downside. Good traders manage the downside; they don't worry
about the upside.
You can't get beat if you have a great defense. I would always pre-


--- PAGE 97 ---
MAiiWINERVINI
fer to bet on a football team that has a great defense as opposed to
one that has a great offense. If a trade doesn't work out quickly, I take
a small loss, and I may have to take a small loss many times.
What if you get stopped out of a trade five times? Don't you find
it difficult to get back in the sixth time?
Not if it meets my criteria. Again, poker provides a good analogy. Pre-
vious hands mean nothing. The current hand determines the proba-
bilities. You have to make the correct decision based on that
information. Whether you lost or won in previous hands is totally
irrelevant. Therefore, I have no problem putting on the same trade
many times.
Early on, when I got stopped out of a position, that was it. I wiped
it out of my mind and started looking for another stock. I began to
notice, however, that many times I would get stopped out of a stock,
then look at it a few months later and see that it had doubled or even
tripled. 1 would exclaim to myself, "God, I was in that stock!" I real-
ized that I needed to develop a plan to get back on board after I was
stopped out of a position.
I guess there is a psychological difficulty involved in reentering a
position at a higher price after you've been stopped out.
Yes, and even worse, you might get stopped out again. If you are, can
you get in a third time? I can do it as many times as necessary to get
the trade right. Sometimes when a stock stops you out several times,
it sets up as a much higher probability trade.
Can you give me a specific example?
Let's say I buy a stock because of a signal by my model and the mar-
ket dips enough to stop me out. The stock then witnesses a huge
reversal and closes near the high of the day. That price action may be
an indication that there was a shakeout, which knocked out most of
the weak hands, and the stock is ready to go up. Putting the long posi-
tion back on at that point may well be a higher probability trade than
the original trade.
In that type of situation, do you get in on the close or on the next
opening?
It depends. I have specific setups that must be met before I enter the
trade.
S T O C K AROUCD THEta-OCK
What do you mean by a setup?
The initial condition is based on the long-term price action. Then
there are confirming fundamental conditions, which may be overrid-
den in certain circumstances. Finally, determining the entry point is
based strictly on the price action.
I assume the type of price action you're using for confirmation to
enter a trade is much shorter term than the type of price action
you initially use to screen for a potential buy candidate?
That's correct.
In other words, you might call your combination of entry condi-
tions a price action sandwich.
That's exactly what it is—a price action sandwich.
One of Minnervini's associates who had been sitting in as an observer
during the interview chuckled at this last remark. Apparently he consid-
ered the analogy apt and had certainly never heard the methodology
described this way.
Were there any other major pivotal points in your transition from
failure to success?
After I had been trading for several years following my initial wipeout
in the markets, I decided to do an analysis of all my trades. I was par-
ticularly interested in seeing what happened to stocks after I sold
them. When I was stopped out of a stock, did it continue to go lower,
or did it rebound? When I took profits on a stock, did it continue to go
higher? I got tremendous information out of that study. My most
important discovery was that I was holding on to my losing positions
too long. After seeing the preliminary results, I checked what would
have happened if I had capped all my losses at 10 percent. I was
shocked by the results: that simple rule would have increased my
profits by 70 percent!
Yes, but did you take into account the fact that by capping your
losses, you were also knocking out some previous winners that
initially went down more than 10 percent and then rebounded?
You're absolutely right, and that was the next thing I checked. I found
that it didn't make too much of a difference. Capping my losses at 10


--- PAGE 98 ---
M A R K M I N E R V I ?
percent only knocked out a few of my winners. I noticed that the win-
ning trades usually worked from the onset. I realized that it was not
only totally unnecessary to go through the pain of holding on to posi-
tions with large open losses, but also actually detrimental to do so.
I also realized that by holding on to some of my losing positions for
extended periods of time, I was tying up my capital. Therefore, the
impact of the large losers went beyond the losses themselves, since
holding on to these positions was keeping me from making profits
elsewhere. If I took this impact into account, the benefit of capping
my losses was astronomical.
Based on your earlier comments, you are obviously risking far
less than the 10 percent maximum loss cap you used in this
study. How do you decide where to place your stop-loss points?
Not every trade I put on is the same. I will use much wider stops on
long-term trades than short-term trades. I will also use much wider
stops when I think the market is in the early stages of a bull move
than if I think the market is overdone and due for a correction. The
essential principle is that the stop-loss point should be a function of
the expected gain.
Do any other experiences stand out as important in your trans-
formation into a highly successful trader?
I learned not to impose any artificial restrictions on my upside poten-
tial. At one point during the summer of 1995, I was up over 100 per-
cent year to date, which achieved my original goal for the entire year.
I was seriously considering booking the year. A friend of mine asked,
"What makes you think you can't make 200 percent?" I thought about
it for a day or two, and said to myself that he's right. I ended that year
up 407 percent.
I know you use both fundamental and technical analysis. Do you
weight one more than the other?
Roughly speaking, I would say my weighting is fifty-fifty. But there is
an important distinction between the relative importance I assign to
price action versus fundamentals. Although I would never bet on my
fundamental ideas without some confirming price action, I might
consider buying a stock with apparent negative fundamentals if its
relative price performance is in the top 2 percent of the market.
Why is that?
Because the price action may be telling you that the stock is dis-
counting a potential change in the fundamentals that is not yet evi-
dent. The combination of strong price action and weak current
fundamentals often occurs in turnaround companies or companies
with a new technology whose potential is not yet widely understood.
How many charts do you review each day?
I run preliminary computer screens on roughly ten thousand com-
panies and narrow the list down to about eight hundred stocks.
Each night, 1 review the charts for all these stocks. My first pass-
through is very quick, and on average I'll spot about 30 to 40 stocks
that look interesting. I then review these stocks more closely, scruti-
nizing the company's fundamentals, if I haven't already done so
recently, and select several that might be considered for purchase
the next day.
What length price charts do you look at?
Anything from ten years down to intraday, but I always look at a five-
year, one-year, and intraday chart.
What kind of price patterns are you looking for when you put on
a trade?
1 don't use the conventional chart patterns. I don't find them particu-
larly useful.
So what do you look for in a chart?
Many of the patterns that I have observed and found useful are more
complex variations of conventional chart patterns. I have a list of pat-
terns that I've named. These are patterns that repeat over and over.
They have repeated since the 1800s, and they will repeat forever.
When I look at charts and see these patterns, I don't know how any-
one in the world could miss them. But, of course, they do, just as I
did early in my career.
How many of these patterns are there?
About twenty.
Can you provide one as an example.
I'd rather not.
How did you discover these patterns?
I started with common chart patterns and found that they worked


--- PAGE 99 ---
great sometimes and didn't work at all at other times. I spent a lot of
time focusing on when patterns worked.
I constantly try to figure out how the market can trick or frustrate
the majority of investors. Then after the majority have been fooled I
get in at what I call the "point of smooth sailing." A so-called failed sig-
nal can actually be the beginning of a more complex pattern that is far
more reliable than the initial signal based on a conventional pattern.
For example.
For example, assume a stock breaks out of a trading range on high
volume. It looks great. People buy it, and then the stock collapses. In
this scenario, most people will view the original breakout as a failed
technical signal. The original breakout, however, may be only the
beginning of a more complex pattern that is far more reliable than the
breakout itself.
Could you detail one of these patterns?
I don't want to do that. It's not that I think revealing them would
make a difference. I could print a description of these patterns in Tlie
Wall Street Journal, and 1 think that 99 percent of the people who
would read the article wouldn't use them or use them the way I do.
Then why not reveal them?
Because it's not what's important to trading successfully. What is
important is controlling your losses and having a plan. Besides, for
someone to be successful, they have to develop their own methodol-
ogy. 1 developed my method for myself; it wouldn't necessarily be a
good fit for anyone else.
Although I am convinced that Minervini believes this is true, I also think
he doesn't want to divulge any of his original chart analysis because, on
some level, he obviously must think that such a disclosure might
adversely affect the efficacy of the patterns he uses, which is perfectly
reasonable. My further efforts to get him to provide some specifics about
his chart methodology proved futile. He didn't even want to reveal the
names of his chart patterns on the record; he read a list of their names to
me only after I had turned off my tape recorder.
STOCK A R O U N D THIK3,:OCK
I assume you use these price patterns as triggers to get you into a
trade. Do you also use them to get out of a trade?
Yes.
The same patterns?
Yes and no. The same patterns are interpreted differently, depend-
ing on where they occur. For example, if a pattern occurs during a
collapse as opposed to during a runaway bull market, it might have a
precisely opposite interpretation. You can't blindly interpret a pat-
tern without considering where it occurs within the larger price pic-
ture.
When you said earlier that you don't look at conventional chart
patterns, do you mean to imply that you don't attach any signifi-
cance to breakouts to new highs?
No, a stock going to a new high is typically a bullish event because
the market has eliminated the supply ol: all previous buyers who had a
loss and were waiting to get out at even. That's why stocks often run
up very rapidly once they hit new high ground—at that point, there
are only happy investors; all the miserable people are out.
But don't stocks often break out to new highs and then come
right back into the prior range?
That usually doesn't happen if you buy breakouts to new highs
after a correction to the first leg in a bull trend. In that case, stocks
usually take off like a rocket after they break out to new highs. Less
skilled traders wait to buy the stock on the pullback, which never
comes.
When do you get breakouts that fail?
In the latter stages of a bull market after the stock has already run up
dramatically. Chart patterns are only useful if you know when to
apply them; otherwise, you might as well be throwing darts.
What advice would you have for a novice whose goal was to
become a successful trader?
First and foremost, understand that you will always make mistakes.
The only way to prevent mistakes from turning into disasters is to
accept losses while they are small and then move on.
Concentrate on mastering one style that suits your personality,


--- PAGE 100 ---
which is a lifetime process. Most people just cannot weather the
learning curve. As soon as it gets difficult, and their approach isn't
working up to their expectations, they begin to look for something
else. As a result, they become slightly efficient in many areas without
ever becoming very good in any single methodology. The reality is
that it takes a very long time to develop a superior approach, and
along the way, you are going to go through periods when you do
poorly. Ironically, those are the periods that give you the most valu-
able information.
What else?
You need to have a plan for every contingency. When a pilot and copi-
lot are flying a jetliner and something goes wrong with an engine, you
can be sure that they don't have to figure out what to do on the spur
of the moment; they have a contingency plan. The most important
contingency plan is the one that will limit your loss it you are wrong.
Beyond that, you need a plan to get back into the trade if you're
stopped out. Otherwise, you'll often find yourself getting stopped out
of a trade, and then watching the position go up 50 percent or 100
percent while you're on the sidelines.
Don't you then find yourself sometimes getting stopped out and
reentering a trade multiple times?
Sure, but I don't have a problem with that. 1 would rather get stopped
out of a trade five times in a row, taking a small loss each time, than
take one large loss.
What are some other relevant contingency plans?
A plan for getting out of winning trades. There are two ways to liqui-
date a trade—into strength or into weakness—and you need a plan
for both.
What other advice do you have for novice traders?
Many amateur investors get sloppy after gains because they fall into
the trap of thinking of their winnings as the "market's money," and in
no time, the market takes it back. It's your money as long as you pro-
tect it.
Also, you don't have to make all-or-nothing decisions. If a stock is
up and you're unsure what to do, there's nothing wrong with taking
profits on part of it.
S T O C K A R O U N D THTICiOCK
What mistakes do people make in trading?
They let their egos get in the way. An investor may put in hours of
careful research building a case for a company. He scours the com-
pany's financial reports, checks Value Line, and may even try the
company's products. Then, soon after he buys the stock, his proud
pick takes a price dive. He can't believe it! He makes excuses for the
stock's decline. He calls his broker and searches the Internet, looking
for any favorable opinions to justify his position. Meanwhile, he
ignores the only opinion that counts: the verdict of the market. The
stock keeps sliding, and his loss keeps mounting. Finally, he throws in
the towel and feels completely demoralized—all because he didn't
want to admit he had made a mistake in timing.
Another mistake many investors make is that they allow them-
selves to be influenced by what other people think. I made this mis-
take myself when I was still learning how to trade. I became friends
with a broker and opened an account with him. We played this game
called "bust the other guy's chops when his stock is down." When I
had a losing stock position, 1 was embarrassed to call him to sell the
stock because I knew he would he would ride me about it. If a stock I
bought was down 5 or 10 percent, and I thought I should get out of it,
I found myself hoping it would recover so 1 wouldn't have to call him to
sell it while it was down. Before I knew it, the stock would be down 15
or 20 percent, and the more it fell, the harder it became for me to call.
Eventually, I learned that you have to ignore what anybody else thinks.
Many people approach investing too casually. They treat investing
as a hobby instead of like a business; hobbies cost money. They also
don't take the time to do a post-trade analysis on their trades, elimi-
nating the best teacher: their results. Most people prefer to forget
about their failures instead of learning from them, which is a big
mistake.
What are some misconceptions people have about trading?
They think it is a lot easier than it is. Sometimes people will ask me
whether they can spend one weekend with me so I can show them
how I do this stuff. Do you know what a tremendous insult this is? It's
like my saying to a brain surgeon, "If you have a few extra days, I'd like
you to teach me brain surgery."


--- PAGE 101 ---
The current market mania, particularly in the dot.com and other
Internet stocks, has deceived many people into believing that trading
is easy. Some guy buys Yahoo, makes four times as much as the best
fund managers, and thinks he is a genius.
How important is gut feel to successful trading1?
Normal human tendencies are traits that cause you to do poorly.
Therefore, to be successful as a trader you need to condition abnor-
mal responses. You hear many traders say that you have to do the
opposite of your gut response—when you feel good about a position,
you should sell, and when you feel terrible about it, you should buy
more. In the beginning that's true, but as you condition yourself for
abnormal responses, somewhere along the line you become skilled.
Then your gut becomes right. When you feel good, you actually
should go long, and when you fell bad, you should sell. That's the
point when you know you have reached competency as a trader.
What differentiates you from the majority of traders who are a
lot less successful?
Discipline. I don't think anyone is more disciplined than J am. When
I put on a trade, I have a contingency plan for every possible out-
come. 1 can't think of any circumstance that would be an exception.
If there were, I would have a plan for that too.
What else?
I trade for a living. When you have to earn a living every day from
trading, finding a way to be consistent becomes a necessity.
How do you know when you are wrong in a position?
The stock goes down. That's all you need to know.
How much vacation time do you take a year?
I don't take vacations during trading days. I haven't missed a day in
the market in over ten years.
Even when you're sick?
Even when I'm sick. I've traded through pneumonia. I've traded with
a temperature of 105 degrees.
What is your typical day like?
I get into work around 8 A.M. and work till about 7 P.M. Then I take a
few hours to eat and exercise, and go back to work from ten at night
S T O C K A R O U N D T H E
until one in the morning. Then I do it all over again. Sunday I usually
work from midday into the night. Saturday I rest and recharge.
No vacations, six-day workweeks, and fourteen-hour workdays.
Don't you ever feel the need to take a break?
My desire to be the best trader is greater than my desire to take a
break. I don't like to get out of the swing.
Sure, I would have liked it better if Minervini had been more
forthcoming with the specifics of how he selects stocks and times his
trades, but I have to agree with him that the most important advice
he can give—and does provide—relates to his trading philosophy.
The main points of this doctrine include:
*• Rigorously control your losses.
K Develop a method that fits your own personality, and master
that one style.
^ Do your own research, act on your own ideas, and don't be
influenced by anyone else's opinion.
>• Have a contingency plan for every possible event, which
includes how to get back into a trade if you are stopped out and
when to take profits if the trade goes in your direction.
>• Maintain absolute discipline to your plan—no exceptions!
Yes, I know, some of these points, such as discipline and loss con-
trol, have become cliches as trading advice. But this doesn't make
these principles any less important. Why do you think they became
cliches? The fact is that discipline and loss control are the two fac-
tors that were most frequently mentioned as keys to trading success
by the traders I interviewed, both in this book and its two predeces-
sors. The problem is that traders and investors have heard this advice
so often that they often fail to hear it at all—and that would be a cru-
cial mistake.
One exercise that Minervini did that proved extraordinarily help-
ful to him was to analyze his past trades. The insights of this analysis
changed his trading style forever and helped him to make the transi-


--- PAGE 102 ---
MARK*
tion from marginal performance to spectacular success. In his own
case, Minervini found that by capping the maximum loss on his
trades, he could dramatically increase his overall returns, even after
allowing for winning trades that would have been eliminated by this
rule. This discovery allowed him to make a lot more profit with much
less aggravation. Other traders and investors may find that a similar
comprehensive analysis of their past trades reveals patterns that
point the way to improve their own performance.
Interestingly, the methodology that Minervini eventually devel-
oped was precisely the opposite of his instinctive approach as a
novice, which was buying low-priced stocks that were making new
lows. Success required not merely the adaptability to modify his ini-
tial approach, but also the flexibility to acknowledge that his original
ideas were completely wrong. The lesson is that early failure does not
preclude long-term success, as long as one is receptive to change.
STEVE LESCARBEAU
The Ultimate Trading System
Steve Lescarbeail's systems are the next best thing to a daily subscription to
tomorrow's Wall Street Journal. Lescarbeau invests in mutual funds. His
goal is to hold them while they are going up and to be in a money market
fund while they are going down. He times these asset transfers with
such precision that he more than triples the average annual returns of
the funds he invests in while sidestepping the bulk of their periodic
downturns.
During the five years he has traded, Lescarbeau has realized an aver-
age annual compounded return of over 70 percent. As impressive as this
may be, what is truly remarkable about his track record is that this high
return has been achieved with extraordinary risk control: His worst
equity decline from a month-end peak to a subsequent month-end low
was a minuscule 3 percent. His consistency is also astounding: He has
been profitable in 91 percent of all months, and his annual return has
exceeded 50 percent every year.
For reasons he explains in the interview, Steve Lescarbeau is almost
paranoid about revealing any details about his trading systems. He is also
not interested in raising any money to manage. Why then did Lescarbeau
even agree to do this interview? First, I assured Lescarbeau that he would
see this chapter and have the opportunity to approve it before it was
printed. Second—and this is just my guess—by his own account, Lescar-
beau's initial research direction was inspired by the Gil Blake interview in
my book The New Market Wizards. Perhaps agreeing to this interview was
a courtesy granted for having provided this indirect aid to his own career.
Lescarbeau doesn't let up. Even though he has created some incredi-
189


--- PAGE 103 ---
T H E U L T I M A T E T R 5 D I N G S Y S T E M
bly effective trading systems, he continues his research to find even bet-
ter systems. His drive is not restricted merely to the markets; when he
was in sales, he was consistently the top salesman in his company.
Lescarbeau even approaches his leisure activities with intensity. He
doesn't merely go for a bicycle ride; he goes for a hundred-mile bicycle
ride—at least he did until he blew out his knee by doing excessive repeti-
tions, at too high a setting, on a weight-training machine.
Lescarbeau works alone at his home in a small rural town outside of
Albany, New York. The interview was started and completed in Lescar-
beau's home office, a corner room with dark wood paneling, floor-to-ceiling
bookcases, and windows overlooking his lawn. The middle portion of the
interview was conducted over a buffet lunch at a local Italian restaurant,
at which we were the only diners (due to the lateness of the hour for
lunch, not the quality of the food).
How did you first get interested in the stock market?
I got involved in the financial services industry in 1983, working for a
mutual fund company. To be perfectly candid, 1 switched into this
field because I thought it was the place I could make the most
amount of money as a sales kind of guy. I had a degree in chemistry
from Boston University, which helped, but no training whatsoever on
the financial side.
How do you go from chemistry to the sale of financial invest-
ments?
As a plug to BU, my degree in chemistry has been extremely helpful.
I think that a physical science degree is as good as if not better than a
financial degree because it trains you to be analytical. If there is any-
thing I am really good at, it's being a researcher. I'm not a particularly
good trader. When I got out of school, I was sick and tired of studying,
and I just wanted to make money. I got a job in sales using my chem-
istry background.
You didn't try to get a job directly in chemistry?
No, chemists don't make any money, but salesmen do.
Didn't you figure that out in college?
Yes, when I was a senior [he laughs].
What were you selling?
Filtration systems to the pharmaceutical and electronic industries. It
was very high-tech stuff. I was very good at selling, I was number one
in sales for three years in a row.
How did you develop the talent for sales?
I'm just a willful person.
How did you go from selling filtration systems to selling financial
investments?
When I won the salesman-of-the-year award, one of the prizes was a
trip to La Costa, California. I remember driving clown the Monterey
Peninsula, seeing all these phenomenal houses, and thinking that I
would never make the kind of money to be able to afford a similar
house if I stayed with my firm. That's when I decided to leave and do
something where I could make more money. I looked into two
fields—medical delivery and financial services—because the incomes
were unlimited for a salesperson. In 1983, 1 took a job as a regional
sales manager at a mutual fund company.
Did you have any experience in financial markets?
None whatsoever. In fact, when I won the salesman-of-the-year
award at my previous job, they also gave me a hundred shares of
stock. I didn't even know what it was. I guess you can't be much more
ignorant of the market than that.
How did the new job work out?
I loved the job and did very well over the next few years. However,
because of limitations that the company placed on me, I realized
that if I wanted to take the next step, I would have to do something
different.
I decided to become a stockbroker. I was interviewed and hired by
Shearson Lehman Brothers. While I was there, I met Tim Hoik, who
was in managed futures—an area I knew absolutely nothing about.
Tim had raised some retail money for Commodities Corporation. [At
the time, Commodities Corporation had a group of in-house traders
who managed the firm's proprietary funds as well as outside investor
funds. Two of the traders I interviewed in Market Wizards—Michael
Marcus and- Bruce Kovner—achieved their early success at Com-
modities Corporation.] One day, I went down with Tim to meet with


--- PAGE 104 ---
some traders at Commodities Corporation. After that meeting, I told
Tim, "Screw the retail money; let's go after institutional money."
I cold-called Eastman Kodak. That initial call ultimately led to
their opening a $50 million account—the largest investment ever in
managed futures. They eventually upped their investment to $250
million.
What did you know about managed futures?
Nothing, but I did know enough to realize that it was a waste of time
to call individuals and that it made a lot more sense to call institutions.
Then how did you sell Kodak on the product?
I told them, "Here is an investment that has no correlation with the
stock market and has been compounding at about 30 percent per
year." The Kodak account started me toward financial independence.
After the Kodak sale you must have thought: "This is really easy!"
I expected the money to pour in.
Were you successful at opening other accounts?
We tried to open other institutional accounts, but nothing happened.
We basically had one account. No other institutions stepped up the
plate.
So, on your first sales call, you landed a $50 million account,
and then you never made another sale again.
It's hard to believe, but it's the honest-to-God truth. The Kodak
account was my only source of income.
Still, given the size of the account, you had to be doing pretty
well.
We were making a lot of money off the account, but the problem was
that it was a typical managed futures account—up-and-down, up-
and-down—it was sickening to watch. The traders would make
money, and then they would give it all back. I was concerned about
losing the account because of all the volatility. So I started looking
around for something else to do.
Sometime around 1993, I became interested in a stock market
newsletter written by a guy in Texas. He put out recommendations on
mutual sector funds and had a good track record. I called him up and
suggested that we do a fund. He agreed, and the fund was launched
in September 1993. He was the trader, and I raised the money.
T H E U L T I M A T E TODING S Y S T E M
Had he traded before this fund was formed?
No, he was just a newsletter writer. This was his first experience with
trading real money.
Hadn't the idea of trading occurred to him before?
I think he was somewhat conservative. He had a good position at
IBM, which he was reluctant to give up. He had been writing the
newsletter on the side. I convinced him to leave IBM. In the first ten
months I raised approximately $10 million. After the first year, he was
up about 9 percent with a lot of volatility. I realized that this was not
for me—the equity swings were just too volatile relative to the
mediocre returns being realized.
By late 1994, I had become completely disenchanted. At the same
time, I had begun doing my own research on mutual fund timing and
thought I could do better. The trading manager and I agreed to split
. 
up. He kept the individual managed accounts, and I took over man-
agement of the partnership account.
You said you began doing research. Had you developed a trading
method by the time you took over as the fund manager?
No, 1 didn't have enough confidence in my research. I knew I wasn't
quite there yet.
Then what was your plan for trading the fund?
I didn't have any great plan. I just knew that what we were doing
wasn't working. I had enough confidence in my abilities to believe
that I could come up with something better.
So your trading method was still a work in progress at the time
you took over the trading responsibilities.
Yes.
Did you consider delaying the split with your partner until you
had developed your own trading strategy?
No, I knew I would come up with something. There was absolutely
no doubt in my mind. I had never failed to succeed at anything that I
put my mind to, and this was no different.
Still you had never traded successfully.
The characteristics of being a good trader or investor are very similar
to the traits needed for success in general. I think it would be very dif-
ficult to find someone who was not successful at what he was cur-


--- PAGE 105 ---
S T E V E L E S C A R B E A U
rently doing, put him in a trading position, and make him successful.
I don't think that is going to happen. The same qualities that make
you a successful person in whatever you're doing are going to make
you successful in trading. You have to be very decisive, extremely dis-
ciplined, relatively smart, and above all, totally independent. I have
those traits. Therefore, when I decided to become a money manager,
it didn't require a leap of faith to believe that I would be successful.
Since you hadn't fully developed an alternative trading method
when you began trading the fund, how did you make your trading
decisions?
It was a joke. I didn't know what I was doing. I did what everyone else
does. I looked at a chart, and if it looked strong, I bought it.
How long did this go on?
For most of the first quarter of 1995. I was lucky to finish the quarter
up a few percent. By March 1995, I had systematized my approach
and felt confident that I had come up with something that would
work. I implemented an embryonic version of what I do now.
That implies that you have changed your system very substan-
tially since you first started. Were these changes a consequence
of ongoing research, or were they triggered by your trading
experiences?
I had several important events in my track record that caused me to
change significantly from what I had started out doing. I had a very
good first year. 1 finished 1995 with a 58 percent gain and no losing
months from the time I adopted my systematic approach.
In January 1996, however, I found myself down about 5 percent
by midmonth. That may not sound like much to most people, but to
me it was a huge amount. Because of that drawdown, I spent an enor-
mous amount of time doing research on the computer and ended up
making very significant changes to my methodology.
Everything went along well until late 1996, when my trading
results went relatively flat. For the fourth quarter of 1996 and the first
quarter of 1997 combined, 1 was up only a little over 1 percent. This
was definitely not what I was looking for. I realized that I had to make
some changes. During that period, I was on the computer all day,
almost every day. In March 1997, 1 implemented some very signifi-
D I N G S Y S T E M
cant changes to my systems. Since then, the performance has been
quite good.
Although my systems have been unchanged since then, over time
I realized that I could combine my systems with my experience. Now
my systems tell me what to do, but there is also judgment involved.
This judgment doesn't necessarily make me more money, but it does
reduce my equity swings. I usually err on the side of caution if I lack
conviction on a trade.
Can you give me an example of how you use judgment.
There is never any judgment whether to buy or sell; the only judg-
ment is how much to buy or sell. The problem with system trading is
that it doesn't tell you how to trade your portfolio; it just gives you buy
and sell signals. I trade several different systems, each based prima-
rily on one indicator. I might have a system that has been performing
extremely well give me a buy signal, but I may decide to take a
smaller-than-normal position because other systems are giving me
contradictory indications.
What is another example of judgment causing you to deviate
from the strict signals of your system?
Let's say the market has been trending up for a while, my systems are
long, and I'm making a lot of money. Although everything may look
great, I get uncomfortable when my equity line starts going above its
long-term uptrend. I am likely to cut back my position size, anticipat-
ing that the equity line will come back to the long-term trend. Judg-
ment like that saves me money rather than makes me money.
Judgment is also important in deciding which systems I use. Inter-
estingly, the systems I used a few years ago are not doing particularly
well anymore. Somehow I've been successful in changing so that I'm
usually trading the best systems. I can't tell you how I've managed to
do it. I guess it must be intuition.
If you stop trading a system because it shows some deterioration,
do you sometimes go back to using it several years later?
No, because I replace inferior systems with superior systems. There
is a reason why I replace trading systems, and the reason is that I
have a better idea. I still keep an eye on old trading systems, but I
won't use them.


--- PAGE 106 ---
S T E V E 
LI
Doesn't it sometimes happen that a discarded system begins per-
forming better than a system you are currently using?
It probably will happen at some point, but it hasn't happened yet.
Do you trade individual stocks?
No, although it is very likely that my systems would also work on
stocks. In fact, that's my next research project.
So, what is your trading vehicle?
Mutual funds, but I'm not a market timer. Let's discriminate between a
market timer and what I consider myself—a market reactor. A market
timer says, "The market is too risky here. I think the Dow is going down
to 8,000 during the next three months." They have a view about what is
going to happen. They prognosticate the market. I do not attempt to
prognosticate the market. I react to what happens in the market.
Your actions, however, will be the same as a market timer. You
will switch back and forth between a mutual fund and cash,
based on the timing signals of your systems. Isn't that the same
thing as a market timer?
The actions may be the same as a market timer, but the thinking is
completely different. I make no predictions. I have absolutely no idea
what is going to happen [he laughs].
Why are you laughing?
I'm laughing about the people who do make predictions about the
stock market. They don't know. Nobody knows. I don't think anybody
has any idea what is going to happen in the stock market.
Does your own performance depend on the mutual funds you
choose to trade?
Only to a very limited extent.
Do you trade mutual funds that represent the broader market?
I have tested my systems on marketwide funds, and they work well.
But I usually prefer to go after a smaller area of the market. I'm look-
ing for funds that would have a bit more zing on the upside, and the
S&P is not zing. Therefore, I'm much more likely to trade something
like a technology fund than a broadly diversified fund.
I don't expect you to reveal the systems you are currently using.
However, are there systems that you developed in the past and
that worked for a while, but are worthless to you now? At least
T H E ULTIMATE TRADiTTG S Y S T E M
that would provide an illustration of what a system idea that
worked for a while looks like.
I can give you an example of something that might not be too distant
from what I used to do by describing my perception of Gil Blake's sys-
tem. [Blake was a trader interviewed in The New Market Wizards.]
Gil's approach was to follow different sectors, and if on a given day, a
sector had both above-average volatility and above-average return, it
would be considered a buy signal for that sector fund, or a "green
light," to use his terminology. Then he would hold the long position in
that fund until his sell condition was met, which might have been a
down day, or the passage of a specific number of days following the
buy signal, or some other liquidation condition.
That system provides a good example of the kind of thinking that 1
do. There is no reason why you couldn't implement that type of sys-
tem today. Although it wouldn't do remotely as well as what I am
using now, it would probably still work to some degree.
Did you have that type of idea before you read the Gil Blake
chapter?
No. Reading the Gil Blake chapter was a key turning point for me.
Although what I do now has nothing to do with what Gil was doing
then, it at least helped me get to the point where 1 could start doing
research on the computer.
Did you ever talk to Gil Blake?
Yes, I called him when I first started managing money and said, "My
name is Steve Lescarbeau, and I just wanted to tell you that you're
the reason I'm in this business." He groaned, "Oh God."
Yes, I could imagine how many times he had heard that line. If
you had not read his chapter, would you have ended up in this
business?
I don't know; it was that important.
Does your original trading system—the one inspired by Gil
Blake's interview—still work?
It works, but it has degraded a lot.
Do you think this might be a temporary phase and that in the
future it might start working very well again?
I doubt it.


--- PAGE 107 ---
S T E V E 
L E S C A R B E - A U *
Can you see yourself ever using it again?
No.
If you don't expect to ever use it again, and it's not related to
what you are doing now, is there any reason why you couldn't
talk about it more specifically?
Well, you never know [he lets out a long laugh].
Are you still in the process of trying to improve what you are
doing?
Absolutely. I'm trying to, but I don't know if I'll be able to. It's hard to
improve on 60 percent a year,* but I'll be happy to maintain it. I'm
constantly concerned that it is going to go away. In fact, I know it will.
If you come back a year from now, I'll probably be doing something
different. I'm sure what I'm doing now won't work as well as it has up
until this point.
You are implying that systems have a life span.
There is absolutely no doubt about it. There is no way anyone could
convince me otherwise. Systems definitely have a life span.
Why do you think that is?
I think it's because eventually enough people figure it out. When too
many people jump on the bandwagon, the market takes it away. That's
why 1 would be very skeptical about anyone being able to buy a trad-
ing system that worked—that is, a system that made money with an
acceptable level of risk.
If you develop a system that you have thoroughly tested and truly
believe works, clon't tell anyone about it. Use it, because it's going to
go away at some point in time. Understand that it won't last forever,
and work on coming up with something different for when that hap-
pens.
I'm always concerned about people figuring out what I do,
because I know if that happens, it's going to stop working. For exam-
ple, the "January effect" is gone. [The January effect is the tendency
for small capitalization stocks to outperform large capitalization
stocks during January—a pattern that until 1993 had repeated in over
*As of March 2000, Lescarbcau's average annual compounded return had risen to 70
percent.
THE U L T I M A T E TRADING S Y S T E M
90 percent of all years since the mid-1920s. Then the pattern failed
six years in a row. Lescarbeau is implying, quite plausibly, that the
January effect's increasing publicity triggered its own demise.]
If too many people are using the same system, what mechanism
in the marketplace causes the system to self-destruct?
I can't answer that question. It could just be a matter of too many
people on the same side of the trade at the same time. Everything I
have experienced tells me that systems have a life span, and not a ter-
ribly long life span.
That speaks to the death of systems; what about the birth of sys-
tems? Will systems start working at some point in time, say 1994,
and then stop working a few years later? Or if you tested the sys-
tems you are currently using over the past twenty or thirty years,
would you find that they worked over the entire time span, but
it's just a matter of your not finding them until more recently?
Usually when I discover a system, it's been working all along. Having
said that, though, I find that the systems that have done the best in
the most recent past also tend to do the best in the immediate future.
Therefore I tend to lean on the systems that have done the best very
recently.
You say that systems have a limited life span, but by your own
admission, the systems you are using have worked for over
twenty years. Why couldn't they work for another twenty
years?
I understand where you are going with that question, but I don't agree
with the conclusion. I don't buy it because there is just a lot more
money pouring into the markets. The best example is the commodity
markets. When we sold the managed futures account to Kodak, the
traders managing the account had systems with great track records;
these systems had been averaging 40 percent for fifteen years. They
said there was no way that these systems would stop working. Well,
they did. They stopped working because too many people started
using similar systems.
Another classic example is O'Shaughnessy. His book What Works
on Wall Street was terrific; it was well written and well researched.
The performance of his funds, however, has been less than stellar.


--- PAGE 108 ---
What do you consider "less than stellar"?
[At this point, Lescarbeau looks up the performance of O'Shaugh-
nessy's funds on his computer screen. He checks two of the funds
and finds that they are up 43 percent and 46 percent. Although this
doesn't sound too disastrous, during the same time period (late 1996
to mid-1999), the S&P 500 was up 89 percent. So, these funds made
only about half as much as the S&P 500, which is representative of
the benchmark they were designed to beat.] Great book. He tested
his strategies all the way back to the early 1950s, but they don't work.
So, even though his strategies worked for over forty years at the
time the book was published, they have stopped working in
recent years.
You know what? Had he not published his book, they might well have
continued to work. He should have just managed money and not pub-
lished his book; of course, if he hadn't published the book, he proba-
bly wouldn't have raised any money.
Your premise is that his strategies stopped working because too
many people were following the same ideas.
Exactly. The most important message I can give anyone who reads
your book is that if you have a great idea, don't talk about it.
Some people I have interviewed say, "I could publish my system
in the Wall Street Journal and it wouldn't make a difference." I
take it that you don't agree.
I've read statements like that, and 1 couldn't disagree more.
You feel that if you described your system in The Wall Street
Journal, it would stop working.
It would be over. Tomorrow [he laughs]\
At one point, you had investors, but you no longer do. What
happened?
I had investors from 1995 through 1997. I did very well for them—I
was up 58 percent in 1995, 50 percent in 1996, and 60 percent in
1997. By the end of 1997, I was managing about $35 million. It
became very difficult to use my style of investment, which involves
switching money in and out of mutual funds, because mutual funds
don't like it if you trade more than four times a year.
T H E U L T I M A T E T R A D I N G S Y S T E M
But you trade more than four times a year now.
I trade a lot less money, and I have it spread out over more than
twenty mutual funds.
So you stopped managing money for logistical reasons?
That and because investors can be such a pain.
What could your investors possibly have complained about?
You made over 50 percent every year with hardly any losing
months.
You can't even imagine the stuff they complained about. They com-
plained that I didn't make enough money if I wasn't up at least 4 per-
cent for the month. They complained that I made too much money
because they had to pay taxes on the profits.
I can't believe it; you actually had someone complain that you
made too much money!
I told him that I could lose money; then he wouldn't have to pay any
taxes. I asked him if he would prefer that.
Some investors didn't trust me. Because the results were so good,
they thought I was making up the numbers and had absconded with
their money. They would call my accountant every month to ask if the
money was really in the account.
If the market was up a lot on the day, they would call up and ask,
"Are we in the market?" That would drive me crazy. If the market was
down a lot, they would call up and ask, "Are we out of the market?"
Of course, they always expected me to be on the right side of the
market.
How much of your decision to get out of money management
was due to the headaches given to you by mutual funds and
how much was due to the headaches given to you by your
investors?
Split equally! [He laughs loudly] I think I used the headache I was
getting from the funds as the excuse to give investors their money
back. I did feel badly for those investors who had been with me from
the beginning and had never opened their mouths.
Didn't the friends who were your original investors and hadn't
bothered you try to talk you into not returning their money?


--- PAGE 109 ---
S T E V E ttSlARBEAU
They did, but my problem was how to differentiate between this
friend and that friend? Where do I draw the line? Therefore, I had to
do it across the board.
Did you lose any friendships as a result?
No, although they still ask me to reconsider whenever we get together
for a poker game.
It is interesting that so many of the traders I have interviewed
are poker players.
I love playing poker.
I assume the stakes you are playing at are not terribly meaning-
ful relative to the amount of money you are trading. You could
stay in every hand, and it wouldn't make any difference to
you.
It's pretty hard to get concerned about losing $200 when you've just
lost $100,000, but 1 never let my income level interfere with the way
1 play. I play to win. If a hand is not a good bet, I get out.
Do you ever break your trading rules?
Only on the side of caution. 1 might take partial profits on a position, or
not go fully long on a buy signal, but I will never hold after a sell signal.
Were you that disciplined from the very beginning?
Yes, because prior to that, I did all my screwing up in futures. I made
every possible mistake you could make. I don't even have to go over
them because they are all classic mistakes.
How long did you trade futures?
[He searches his memory for a while, as if trying to retrieve an experience
from the distant reaches of his mind.] For about three years.
Were you a net loser?
Oh, big-time! I made money investing with other futures managers,
but trading for my own account, I turned a $125,000 account into
$50,000. I did everything wrong.
Were there any particularly painful trades during that period?
Too numerous to count.
What stands out?
I developed a currency trading system. I bought this computer soft-
ware program that allowed you to optimize trading systems [to fine-
tune the indicator values in a system so as to maximize the
T H E U L T I M A T E T R A D I N G S Y S T E M
performance results for the tested price data]. Like any stupid
trader, I optimized it completely. [He adjusted the system indicator
values so that they best fit the past price data.] Of course, the
results looked spectacular. [Because by optimizing, he was using
hindsight to define and test the system. The problem is that the
results will be very misleading when applied to unseen price data—
namely, future price data.] I knew better, but I didn't think it applied
to me.
In a span of two weeks, 1 lost about 50 percent of the money in my
trading account. 1 started veering from the system, and every time I
did, it was the absolute wrong time to do it. It was a nightmare. I real-
ized I wasn't cut out to trade futures.
This sounds like the only thing you ever did where you failed.
With everything else you kept at it until you succeeded. Why did
you give up here?
Because I realized futures were a losing game. The commissions and
slippage [the difference between the screen price and the actual
trade execution price] placed the odds too much against you. If you
have only a 50 percent chance of being right when you buy or sell,
and you pay commissions and incur slippage costs, you have to lose
over the long run.
But that 50 percent assumption presupposes that you don't have
any edge in the market. Couldn't you have found patterns that
had some reliability and gave you an edge similar to what you did
in the stock market?
I couldn't do it. I couldn't find any patterns that worked.
Are you able to take any vacations?
Yes, as long as I have access to my computer. I own a vacation home
on a lake in New Hampshire.
What if you wanted to go away and hike in the Swiss Alps, or
for that matter even take a full-day hike in the White Moun-
tains?
For five years, I have been available at 3:45 P.M. every day without
exception. I have never taken a day off. The problem with taking a
day off is that it will probably be the day you shouldn't have taken
off.


--- PAGE 110 ---
S T E V E lUCARBEAi]
What happened when you had your knee surgery? [Lescarbeau
and I had compared notes on personal sports injuries on our
drive back from the restaurant.]
I had outpatient surgery with general anesthesia. I returned home at
around 11 A.M., very groggy, and went straight to bed. My wife was
supposed to wake me at 3:30, but out of compassion, she decided to
let me sleep. At 3:45, I woke up with a start. I was in the bedroom,
which is on the other side of the house. I jumped out of bed and with
excruciating pain hobbled down to my office. I looked at the screen,
and based on what I saw, I sold half my portfolio.
An hour later, I returned to the office and looked at the screen
again. I realized that I had totally screwed up. 1 couldn't figure out
why I had sold anything. I had completely misread the information.
As it turned out, the next day the market tanked. It was utter luck.
What percent of the time are you in the market?
About 50 to 55 percent of the time.
Do you use leverage?
Selectively. On average, I'm less than fully invested, even counting
only those days when I am in the market. Occasionally, if conditions
are right, I use leverage. But I have never been leveraged more that
140 percent of my capital—that's the limit of my comfort level. I have
never lost money on a trade that I was leveraged on.
Do you ever go net short?
Ninety percent of my success is clue to not doing things that are stu-
pid. I don't sell winners; I don't hold losers; I don't get emotionally
involved. I do things where the odds are in my favor. Shorting stocks
is dumb because the odds are stacked against you. The stock market
has been rising by over 10 percent a year for many decades. Why
would you want to go against that trend?
Any advice for novice traders?
Don't confuse activity with accomplishment. I think one mistake
novice traders make is that they begin trading before they have any
real idea what they are doing. They are active, but they are not
accomplishing anything. I hardly spend any time trading. Over 99
percent of my time is spent on the computer, doing research.
Although Lescarbeau refused to reveal any details about his own
trading systems, he provides some important insights into the traits
of a successful trader. One characteristic that I have repeatedly
noticed in winning traders—and that is probably true of winners in
any field—is that they are extremely confident. Perhaps no other
trader I have interviewed has exemplified this quality better than
Lescarbeau. He exudes confidence. Consider, for example, his
description of the certainty that he would succeed as a money
manager before he had even developed a methodology. (Lescar-
beau's decision to assume trading responsibility before he had
developed a trading method is not being held up as model of laud-
able behavior—on the contrary, for most people it would represent
a reckless course of action—but only as an illustration of his sense
of confidence.)
An honest assessment of your own confidence level may be the
best indicator of your potential for success. If you are confident that
you will succeed in the markets—not to be confused with wanting to
be confident—then the odds are good that you will. If you are uncer-
tain, then tread very gingerly with your risk capital. Confidence can-
not be manufactured or wished into existence. You either have it, or
you don't. Can't confidence be acquired? Sure, sometimes hard
work—another trait of winning traders—can lead to proficiency,
which can lead to confidence. But even then, until you are truly con-
fident, proceed with great caution in the markets.
Another trait I have noticed among the Market Wizards is that
they approach trading and sometimes other endeavors with an inten-
sity bordering on obsession. Lescarbeau is a perfect example. He
never misses a day—even surgery didn't prevent him from checking
the market. Whenever the performance of his systems failed to meet
his extraordinarily high standards, even though this meant nothing
worse than a break-even quarter or two, he worked incessantly to
develop better systems. Even his recreational activities—for example,
bicycling and weight training—reflect an obsessive streak.


--- PAGE 111 ---
Is there any single trait that is shared by all great traders? Yes, dis-
cipline. Lescarbeau's unfailing sense of discipline is clear in all his
actions. He has never decided to hold a position once he gets a sell
signal. If his system tells him to liquidate, he's out—no questions, no
second-guessing, no qualifications. He never thinks "I'll just give it
one more day" or "I'll get out if it goes down another 2 points." For
Lescarbeau, discipline also demands being there every day to check
the system signals and enter the orders. Every day means every day;
no minivacations, no days off—not even after surgery. The essence of
discipline is that there are no exceptions.
Many people are attracted to the markets because they think it is
an easy way to make a lot of money. Ironically, hard work is one of
the key common denominators I have noted among the traders I
have interviewed. Even though Lescarbeau has already developed
trading systems that are incredible—his trading system results are by
far the best 1 have ever seen and beyond anything I even thought
possible—he continues his research without abatement. He doesn't
relax even though what he is using is working and has been working
for years, but instead he plows ahead daily, as if what he is using will
cease to work tomorrow.
Risk control means longevity. Some traders achieve high returns
for many years, but with large equity retracements as a by-product of
their methodology. Although these traders can attain great track
records, they often skate near the edge—and in doing so they are
always in danger of falling. A trader like Lescarbeau, who keeps his
losses very low, has a much higher probability of long-term success.
MICHAEL MASTERS
Swimming Through
the Markets
Five years ago, Masters was an unemployed stockbroker; today, he is one of
the largest stock traders in the country. Masters, an Atlanta-based fund
manager, got his start in the business as a broker, but he never liked it.
After five years and growing frustration, he virtually forced his own firing.
With no other qualifications than desire and confidence, Masters
decided to start his own fund. He raised his start-up capital by selling ten
1-percent shares in his new company at $7,000 per share (an astound-
ingly fortuitous investment for his initial backers).
In 1995, he launched the Marlin fund, a name that reflects his love
of sportsfishing. During the five years he has managed the hedge fund,
Masters has achieved the extremely rare combination of lofty returns
and low risk: an average annual compounded return of 86 percent, with
only three losing months—the worst a relatively minuscule 3 percent
decline. As of April 2000, assets under management had grown past the
one-half billion dollar mark, reflecting the combined influence of huge
returns and a steady influx of new investors. Total assets would have
been even larger, but Masters had decided to close his fund to new
investment, reflecting his concern that excessive asset growth could
impede performance.
Although its plus-one-half-billion-dollar asset base places Masters
Capital Management among the larger hedge funds, the figure drastically
understates the firm's trading activity. Because of Masters's extremely
high turnover of positions—far more rapid than the industry average—
the firm's level of transactions rivals that of the country's largest hedge
funds and mutual funds.
207


--- PAGE 112 ---
M I C H A I
During trading hours Masters's concentration on the market is
intense and all-inclusive. To avoid any interruptions or distractions, he
locks himself in the trading room with the company's trader, Tom Peil.
The firm's research analysts know the computer lock combination and
can gain entry if they have sufficiently urgent market information. With
rare exception, Masters will not accept any phone calls during market
hours. "He is so completely absorbed watching the market," says Peil,
"that when an important call does come in, I can yell at him repeatedly to
pick up the phone, and he won't hear me until I scream something ludi-
crous like 'purple dragons!'"
Masters is affectionately known as "the big sloppy" by his staff, a
nickname that reflects both his size (six foot five) and the copious amounts
of food he eats at his desk, leaving a wake of leftovers and dirty paper
plates. One of Masters's idiosyncrasies is that he is so used to using a
keyboard to navigate the computer screen—a habit that dates back to the
premouse days when DOS reigned supreme—that he still refuses to use
a mouse except when it is absolutely necessary. "Mike's keyboard clatter-
ing is a constant throughout the day," says Peil. "We joke that when
Mike's time comes, they will have to bury him with his keyboard."
Although he quips about Masters's quirks, Peil's admiration for him
comes through very strongly. Peil, a veteran of brokerage firm trading
desks, was enjoying his retirement, trading his own account, when he
met Masters. He was so struck with Masters's character and talent that
he came out of retirement to join the firm as a trader. When I asked Peil
what he found so impressive about Masters, he cited three factors, two
of which were synonymous with honesty: "First, his integrity; second, his
morality; and third, his determination to succeed."
Masters is an openly religious man. During our conversations, he
referred to the importance of his belief in God to his life in general, and
his trading in particular. "Believing in a higher power gives me the
strength to deal with the losses that are an inevitable part of this busi-
ness. For example, I lost millions of dollars today, which would have been
difficult to handle otherwise." Although Masters didn't mention it him-
self, I learned that he tithes his income. He also works at a Christian
mission regularly.
S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H THE M A R K E T S
Since I was arriving in Atlanta in the evening and had to catch a con-
necting flight the next morning, Masters and I decided to conduct the
interview over dinner. Masters suggested a favorite restaurant of his: Bac-
chanalia. The food was superb, and if you are ever in Atlanta, I can
heartily recommend it, with one caveat: cabdrivers apparently can't find
the place. My cab from the airport got lost, and for all I know the first
two cabs the restaurant called to pick me up are still circling Atlanta.
How did you first get interested in the stock market?
My dad traded for a living back in the 1970s. When I was about
eleven or twelve, I became curious about what he did and asked him
a lot of questions. He gave me a book to read, When to Sell Stocks by
Justin Mammis. Note that the title of the book wasn't When to Buy
Stocks, but When to Sell Stocks. My dad's focus was mainly on short
selling.
How did your dad do in the markets?
He did well enough to support a family for five or six years.
What happened after that?
He went back to school to earn an M.B.A. and then established a
consulting business.
Did you learn anything about the markets from your dad?
Definitely. He taught me the importance of taking profits, which I
have incorporated into our strategy.
Taking profits in what sense?
The idea that a profit isn't real until it is realized.
The other big influence for me were my uncles, Uncle Louie and
Uncle Larry, who both traded stocks. When I was little, we would
have family gatherings. Uncle Louie would be seated on one side,
Uncle Larry on the other, and my dad across the table, and they would
all be talking about the stock market. I was the only son, and I thought
that's what men did. When I got into the business, Uncle Louie and
Uncle Larry were accounts of mine, and I learned a lot from them.
What did they teach you?
The importance of discipline. If you have a loss, get out.


--- PAGE 113 ---
M I C H A E T M A S T E R S
Did you go to college with the intention of becoming a money
manager?
No, I went to college with the intention of becoming a doctor. Actu-
ally, I went to the University of Tennessee because 1 had a swimming
scholarship. That experience helped a lot. There is no way I could be
doing what I am today without that background.
How so?
Getting used to the pain. We did some crazy sets in training. We
would swim as much as twenty thousand or twenty-five thousand
meters a day. The coach would come over and say, "Okay we're going
to do a hundred 200s" [a hundred repeats of 200-yard intervals], and
your heart would sink. You just knew it was going to hurt.
How far did you get in your swimming career?
I was a collegiate ail-American in the sprint freestyle.
What does all-American imply?
It means that you are in the top eight in the NCAA championships.
Did you try out for the Olympics?
I went to the Olympic trials, but I didn't make it. I came down with
the mumps the summer before the trials, and I didn't have enough
time to get back into peak condition. I would, however, have ranked
high enough the year before to have made the team.
Did you try out at the next Olympic trials?
Swimming is not a real profitable sport. I would have been twenty-six
by the time of the next trials. I could have hung around, but I had
been swimming a long time, and I'd had enough of it.
Do you still swim?
I swim a little bit, but not as much as I should. I just don't have the
time.
How did you make the transition from being premed to being a
trader?
When I got through organic chemistry, I realized that I didn't have any
passion for going to medical school.
Why did you want to become a doctor in the first place?
When I was ten years old, I had a really bad accident and ended up in
the hospital for many weeks. As a kid, I was impressed by watching the
S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H THE M A R K E T S
doctors in the hospital, and I thought it would be a good occupation. I
liked the idea that the job combined both science and helping people.
What kind of accident?
I ran into a plate glass window. We had sliding doors out to our pool.
One day I was running back into the house, and I thought I had left
the doors open, but they were closed. I ran right into the glass and it
shattered, cutting me all over. The cut in my leg went all the way
through to my femur and severed my tendons. I don't know if you
noticed, but I still have a limp. I had to relearn how to walk. Actually,
that is how I first became involved in swimming; it was part of the
therapy.
Your mom must have kept the windows very clean.
Yes she did. But after the accident she always made sure to have tape
across the glass doors.
What changed your mind about becoming a doctor? There had to
be more to it than not liking organic chemistry.
After two or three years in college, I realized that I really didn't have
any desire to become a doctor; I was only on that track because of a
goal I had as a ten-year-old. I took some finance courses, which I
really enjoyed, including an investment course that was tremendous,
and I switched my major.
What did you learn in that investment course?
The typical valuation theories—the Graham & Dodd-type stuff [a
classic investment text].
Do you use that type of analysis in your own trading?
I don't use it much, but it's a good background to have. I think it's very
useful just so that you can measure other investors' perceptions of
what is important.
What part of the academic background might still find its way
into your current approach?
Portfolio theory. The conventional theory is that you should diversify
your portfolio so that you can remove the unsystematic, or company
specific, risk. That way, if a company blows up, you don't get hurt by
it. But that also means that you end up tracking the index. If your goal
is to outperform the index, using that type of strategy makes it very


--- PAGE 114 ---
M I C H A E L M A S T E R S
S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H T H E M A R K E T S
difficult to succeed. We stand portfolio theory on its head. We actu-
ally try to take unsystematic risk by being in stocks when the unsys-
tematic risk is high relative to the systematic risk (that is, at times
when the stock's price movement will be more influenced by company-
specific events as opposed to directional movements of the stock
market as a whole).
What did you do after you graduated college?
I decided to go to business school, which allows you to put off the
decision of doing anything for another couple of years. I applied to
Emory, which is a local school, and I didn't bother applying anywhere
else. I was told by the admission officer that they'd love to have me,
but I didn't have the work experience, which I found out was one of
the entry requirements at Emory at the time. The only work experi-
ence I had was mowing lawns and summer jobs at a steel mill, which
didn't exactly qualify.
I decided to get work experience by applying for a job in the bro-
kerage industry. There was a fellow who lived near me who worked at
a brokerage firm and thought I was industrious because he had seen
me mowing lawns in the neighborhood. Also, he had played college
football, and he liked the idea that I had been a college athlete as
well. He told me that he would give me a shot as a broker, even
though I didn't have the typical profile.
What is the typical profile?
Sales experience.
Did they have a training course?
Yes, two weeks on how to sell.
What happened after the training course?
I was given a list of people to cold-call.
Was that difficult to do?
It was real difficult to do. I also did cold-call visits with one of the
other trainees. We knocked on doors in the neighborhood, trying to
get people to open accounts. One time we went into a grocery store,
and it turned out that the owner's brother-in-law had lost all his
money in the stock market. The grocery owner chased us out of his
store, swinging a big loaf of bread at us, and yelling, "I don't want to
talk to you brokers. Get out of here!" [He laughs lengthily at the recol-
lection.]
I guess you were lucky it wasn't a hardware store. What percent
of your cold calls were you able to convert into accounts?
About 1 percent. After I had been in the business for a while, I fig-
ured out that I wanted to be on the managing side, not the selling
side. The company, however, wanted you to sell financial products. If
you were a broker who wanted to manage money, they looked at you
as if you had two heads.
Were you successful as a broker?
I was able to survive, which I guess is somewhat successful. One of
the problems I had with my company was that I thought their com-
mission structure was too high. So I just changed it.
Did you have approval to do that?
I didn't.
You just unilaterally lowered commissions?
Yes, because the commissions were just too high to trade.
So you realized even then that paying full commissions would
make trading a losing game?
Absolutely. If the clients are not going to win, they are not going to
stay with you.
How did your company react to your lowering commissions?
They were upset when they found out about it.
By how much did you reduce commissions?
About 90 percent. Of course, now you have discount brokerage, but it
was different then.
What did you know at the time that was right, and what did you
know that was wrong?
I learned that if I thought ahead about events, I usually made money,
but if I waited until events happened, I would lose. For example, I
remember situations where a company reported positive earnings, but
the stock sold off because the news had already been discounted.
That was a good lesson for me.
When did you make the transition from a broker to a fund man-
ager?


--- PAGE 115 ---
M I C H A E T M A S T E R S
I reached a point where the trading in my own account was becoming
reliably profitable, and I felt I was ready to go out on my own. But the
actual move was a forced issue.
Forced issue in what sense?
I was fired. I had a number of discretionary accounts that were below
the firm's minimum. The office manager said, "You can't trade these
accounts below the company minimum."
I said, "Yes I can."
He said, "No you can't. You're out of here!"
It was something that I psychologically really wanted to happen. I
guess I just needed a good kick in the ass to make the transition. I
wasn't comfortable being a broker anymore.
Why is that?
Because anytime you're trying to make money for both the firm and
the client, there is a built-in conflict. 1 wanted to manage money on a
performance basis because I thought it was far cleaner. I had some
ethical problems with the brokerage business.
Such as?
There are subtle pressures for you to push stocks the firm is under-
writing and to sell mutual funds with whom the firm has a relation-
ship, even though they may be lower-rated funds.
What if you try to sell other mutual funds?
You may get a lower commission on the sale, and in some cases you
may not get any commission at all.
What happened after you got fired?
I spoke to my dad about what I should do, and he suggested that I
should try going out on my own. Although I liked the idea of having
my income based on my performance, I was concerned about
whether anyone would be interested in having me manage their
money when my only experience was being a broker.
What made you believe that you could be a successful money
manager?
Except for my dad and my wife, Suzanne, everyone said that you
couldn't trade successfully and advised me against trying to do it. Your
books [Market Wizards and The New Market Wizards] were actually
very helpful because they showed me that it was possible. Just know-
•S
SWIMMING T H R Q U G I f T H E M A R K E T S
ing that was very important. 1 realized that if somebody could make
money trading, so could I. Also, the fact that I had competed success-
fully at the highest levels of swimming gave me confidence that I
could excel in this business as well.
But what was that confidence based on? Were you getting trad-
ing results anything like those you are getting now?
For years, I had done only slightly better than breakeven in my own
account. But my trading results were just beginning to improve signif-
icantly when I was fired.
What changed?
I started focusing on catalysts. One thing that helped me tremen-
dously was writing the software for my trading ideas. My father wrote
a lot of software for his food service consulting business, and he
advised me, "If you really want to know something, you should write
software for it."
What did you put in your model?
All types of inputs, but I found that the catalysts outweighed every-
thing else. As a result, the model ended up focusing almost com-
pletely on the catalysts.
What exactly do you mean by catalysts':'
A catalyst is an event or an upcoming event that has the potential to
trigger a stock price move by changing the market's perception about
a company.
Isn't a catalyst by definition a one-time event? How do you model
one-time events?
Most catalysts are repetitive events—earnings are reported four times
a year; retail companies report same-store sales monthly; airline com-
panies report load factors monthly, and so on.
How do you use an event such as an earnings report to make
trading decisions?
There have been lots of academic studies to show that stocks with
positive earnings surprises tend to outperform the market, but the
margin of improvement is relatively moderate. Frequently, you may
find that when you buy a stock after a positive earnings surprise, you
are buying it near a price peak because the earnings surprise was
already discounted.


--- PAGE 116 ---
How could it be discounted if it was a "surprise"?
We are talking about two different things. An "earnings surprise" is
defined by academics and Wall Street as a number that is above or
below the consensus estimate by some minimum margin. Whether an
earnings surprise is discounted or not, however, depends on the price
trend before the report's release. For example, if a stock goes up 10
points in a flat market during the week prior to the earnings report,
and earnings are reported as only a nickel better than the consensus,
it may be a "surprise" in terms of the academic definition, but it's
probably already discounted.
Don't any of the academic studies consider the stock price trend
before a number's release?
No, they only look at whether a number beats the consensus expecta-
tions. Although this is still useful information, by considering other
factors, such as the price trend in the stock before the release of the
earnings report and the magnitude of the difference between
reported earnings and expected earnings, you can significantly
increase the probabilities of a successful trade.
For example, if I crossed a street without looking, I could
decrease my chances of getting hit by a car by crossing at 2 A.M.
instead of midday. That would be analogous to the information these
academic studies use—it is worthwhile, but there is lots of room for
improvement. What if I listened when I crossed the street? That
would reduce the odds of my getting hit by a car even more. What if
I not only listened, but looked one way? My survival odds would
increase further. What If I looked both ways? I would increase my
chances even more. That's what we're doing in our analysis. We are
trying to increase the probabilities of a trade being successful as
much as possible.
Therefore, as an example, I assume that if a stock moved down
before a positive earnings surprise, it increases the probabilities
of a bullish market response.
Absolutely. If a stock goes down before a report because of negative
expectations and then there is a positive earnings surprise, there will
be shorts who have to cover, new investors who want to buy, and a
S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H T H E M A R K E T S
completely undiscounted event. In this type of situation you can get a
tremendous response in the stock.
But won't the stock gap up sharply after earnings are reported
and eliminate the profit opportunity?
The stock price will go up, but usually it will not fully discount the
change. That is one of the problems with the efficient market hypothe-
sis. The market doesn't discount all information instantaneously.
What happens when you put on a position before a report
because you anticipate a better-than-expected figure and the
actual number is worse than expected or vice versa?
We just get out, usually right away. We make lots of trades, and I
make mistakes all the time. Every day I come in and get humbled [he
The whole Street focuses on events that provide catalysts; what
gives you the edge?
Our whole focus is looking for catalysts. It's not just part of our strat-
egy; it is our strategy.
How do you decide when to get out of a position?
One thing that has been tremendously helpful is the use of time
stops. For every trade I put on, 1 have a time window within which the
trade should work, ff something doesn't happen within the time stop,
the market is probably not going to discount that event.
What is your balance between longs and shorts?
Our net position averages about 40 percent net long and has ranged
between 90 percent net long and 10 percent net short. A typical
breakdown would be 50 percent long and 10 percent short, with the
remainder in cash.
That's a pretty large portion to keep in cash.
We have a dual mission: to make money for our investors and to pre-
serve capital. Keeping about 40 percent in cash acts as a performance
stabilizer.
How are you able to trounce the index returns while keeping
such a large portion of your capital in cash?
We look at our business like a grocery store. You can get leverage in
two ways: by taking on larger positions or by turnover. Just like a gro-


--- PAGE 117 ---
M I C H A E L M A S T E R S
eery store, we're constantly getting inventory in and moving it out the
door. If we have a piece of meat that's going bad, we mark it down to
get rid of it.
Typically, how long might you hold a position?
On average, about two to four weeks.
What percent of your trades are profitable?
Just over 70 percent.
Do you use technical analysis?
We use technical analysis not because we think it means something,
but because other people think it means something. We are always
looking for market participants to take us out of a trade, and in that
sense, knowing the technical points at which people are likely to be
buying or selling is helpful.
Do you use the Internet as an information source?
The main thing I use on the Internet is TheStreet.com. I like Jim
Cramer's running market commentary. This Web page is one of the
best Internet resources available to the ordinary investor. One thing I
would caution investors about, however, is paying attention to chat
rooms, where the information can be very tainted because people
have an agenda.
Are there trades that have provided valuable lessons?
Hundreds. When you order business cards, you get a huge stack of
them. I hardly ever hand out any business cards because I am not in
marketing. Instead, I use the back of my business cards to jot down
trade lessons. For any trade that I find instructive regarding market
behavior, I'll write down the stock symbol and a brief summary of
what I think I learned from the trade. That's how I developed and
continue to build my trading model.
I believe that writing down your trading philosophy is a tremen-
dously valuable exercise for any investor. Writing down your trading
ideas helps clarify your thought process. I can remember spending
many weekends at the library writing down my investment philoso-
phy: what catalysts I was looking for; how I expected them to affect a
stock; and how I would interpret different price responses. I must
have accumulated over five hundred pages of trading philosophy.
Frankly, it was a lot of drudge work, and I could only do it for so long in
S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H T H E M A R K E T S
one sitting. But the process was invaluable in developing my trading
approach.
What other advice do you have for investors?
One of the benefits of having been a retail broker is that 1 got to see a
lot of people's mistakes. Based on this experience, the most important
advice I can offer investors is: Have a plan. Know why you are buying
a stock, and know what you are looking for on the trade. If you just
take a step back and think about what you are doing, you can avoid a
lot of mistakes.
Masters's approach can be summarized as a four-step process:
1. Learn from experience. For any trade that is instructive (winner or
loser), write down what you learned about the market from that
trade. It doesn't make any difference whether you keep a trader's
diary or use the back of business cards, as Masters does; the
important thing is that you methodically record market lessons as
they occur.
2. Develop a trading philosophy. Compile your experience-based
trading lessons into a coherent trading philosophy. Two points
should be made here. First, by definition, this step will be
unachievable by beginners because it will take the experience of
many trades to develop a meaningful trading philosophy. Second,
this step is a dynamic process; as a trader gathers more experi-
ence and knowledge, the existing philosophy should be revised
accordingly.
3. Define high-probability trades. Use your trading philosophy to
develop a methodology for identifying high-probability trades. The
idea is to look for trades that exhibit several of the characteristics
you have identified as having some predictive value. Even if each
condition provides only a marginal edge, the combination of sev-
eral such conditions can provide a trade with a significant edge.
4. Have a plan. Know how you will get into a trade, and know how
you will get out of the trade. Many investors make the mistake of
only focusing on the former of these two requirements. Masters
not only has a specific method for selecting and entering trades,


--- PAGE 118 ---
M I C H A E L M A S T E R S
but he also has a plan for liquidating trades. He will exit a trade
whenever one of the following three conditions are met: (a) his
profit objective for the trade is realized; (b) the expected catalyst
fails to develop or the stock fails to respond as anticipated; (c) the
stock fails to respond within a predefined length of time (the
"time stop" is triggered).
JOHN BENDER
Questioning the Obvious
If John Bender is right about options*—and, given his performance, there is
good reason to believe he is—then virtually everyone else is wrong. Ben-
der asserts that the option pricing theory developed by Nobel Prize-win-
ning economists, which underlies virtually all option pricing models used
by traders worldwide, is fundamentally flawed. This contention is not
just a theoretical argument; Bender's entire methodology is based on bet-
ting against the price implications of conventional option models. Bender
places trades that will profit if his model's estimates of price probabilities
are more accurate than those implied by prevailing option prices, which
more closely reflect standard option pricing models.
Bender has maintained a surprisingly low profile, in view of the large
sums of money he is managing and his excellent performance. His fund
did not show up in any of the industry databases I checked. As was the
case for the majority of interview subjects in this book and its two prede-
cessors, 1 found Bender through networking with industry contacts.
Bender graduated with high honors from the University of Pennsylva-
nia in 1988, receiving a degree in biophysics. During his summers as an
undergraduate, Bender held several scientific jobs, including positions at
Livermore Labs and the Marine Biological Laboratories at Woods Hole.
Although he liked science, he was disenchanted because the career sci-
entists he observed were forced to spend much of their time seeking
grants instead of doing research. At the same time, he became intrigued
*It is recommended that readers unfamiliar with options first review the brief primer on
options in the appendix before reading this chapter.
221


--- PAGE 119 ---
J O H N 
B E N D E R S
with the markets and saw that they provided a challenging application for
his analytical skills.
Bender began trading his own account after graduation, but he had
only a few thousand dollars of risk capital. After a year, he was able to
raise $80,000 in financial backing. He traded this account from August
1989 through March 1995, averaging a compounded annual return of
187 percent during this period, with only three losing quarters, the worst
being an 11 percent decline.
After taking a sabbatical, Bender launched his fund in August 1996,
with returns over the subsequent three and a half years averaging 33
percent. Although still quite respectable, you might wonder what
caused this steep decline in returns relative to the performance in his
personal account in prior years. The answer is very simple: leverage.
For the fund, Bender reduced his leverage by a factor of approximately
4 to 1 (which because of the effect of monthly compounding reduced
the annual return by a greater amount), placing a strong emphasis on
risk control. To date, the fund's worst decline from an equity peak to a
subsequent low has been only 6 percent. In addition to managing hun-
dreds of millions in his own fund, Bender also manages an undisclosed
allocation from the Quantum fund, for which he trades currency
options.
It is quite common for Market Wizards to use a portion of their sub-
stantial trading profits to support favorite charities or causes. I found one
of Bender's uses for his winnings particularly noteworthy for its original-
ity, long-lasting impact, and hands-on directness in mitigating a problem
before the opportunity for action disappears: He is buying up thousands
of acres of the Costa Rican rain forest to protect this area from destruc-
tion by developers.
A day before leaving for New York City to conduct interviews for this
book, I learned that Bender was scheduled to be in the city at the same
time. Since he lives in Virginia, which is not near any of the other traders
I planned to interview, it seemed convenient to arrange a meeting on our
mutually coincident visit to New York. The only problem was that my
schedule was already booked solid. We decided to meet for a late dinner.
To simplify the logistics, Bender booked a room at my hotel.
D U E S T I O N I N G T H E O B V I O U S
We met in our hotel lobby before leaving for dinner. It was an
extremely warm summer evening. Bender was wearing a suit and tie,
while I had considered substituting Dockers for jeans a sufficient con-
cession to being dressed for dinner. Bender, who had made the reserva-
tions, expressed concern whether I would be allowed into the restaurant
dressed as I was and suggested calling to make sure. I assured him that
I usually did not encounter any problems because of my casual dress.
He seemed almost disappointed when this proved to be the case. As
the evening progressed, I became aware that Bender was clearly uncom-
fortable in his suit and tie, which was obviously atypical dress for him
as well, and somewhat envious of the fact that I had gotten away going
casual. His large frame seemed to strain in his more formal clothes.
The interview was conducted over a wonderful multicourse meal in
a sushi restaurant. We left nearly four hours later, just short of mid-
night, when we suddenly realized that we were the last remaining diners
and that the staff was milling about impatiently, waiting for us to depart.
We took a brief break upon returning to the hotel, I to visit my
orphaned wife, who had accompanied me to the city, and Bender to
check on trades on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in which his firm is a
heavy participant. When we met again in the hotel lobby fifteen min-
utes later, Bender was wearing shorts, a sloppy T-shirt, and a look of
relief at having been freed from his suit and tie. The interview finished
at three-thirty in the morning as the second of my three-hour tapes
rolled to an end.
What was your career goal in college?
My plan was to be a research physicist.
What area of physics were you interested in?
I majored in biophysics. One of the projects I spent a lot of time on
was trying to develop a method for displaying three-dimensional
information using a light microscope. When you look at very small
structures inside of a cell, you essentially have two choices: you can
look at them with an electron microscope or you can look at them
with a light microscope. If you use an electron microscope, you have


--- PAGE 120 ---
the advantage that it magnifies objects very well. The problem is that
you don't have any idea whether the cell you see bears any resem-
blance to what it looked like when it was alive because in order for
the image to show up, you first have to infuse the cell with heavy met-
als. I don't know about you, but I'm sure that if someone shot me and
placed me in a vat of molten lead, I wouldn't come out looking any-
thing like what I look like. The method of observation changed the
object being observed. People would write papers saying that they had
found a new structure in a cell, but then it would turn out to be
merely an artifact of metal crystals precipitating inside the cell.
Everyone recognized the problem with using electron micro-
scopes. Therefore the preferable approach was to try to use light
microscopes. The main problem with light microscopes, however, is
that when you use the extremely high magnification needed to look at
very small objects, the depth of field approaches zero. You can see one
flat slice in focus and everything else is out of focus, which makes it
very difficult to view three-dimensional objects. If you try to view
more than one layer, all you get is mud because the out-of-focus
information wins out. To circumvent this obstacle, we had to come up
with programs that would filter out the out-of-focus information. It's a
very interesting mathematical problem.
Why did you gravitate away from physics?
Physics was a lot of fun as a student. Everyone wants you to provide
research help. You get a chance to work on stuff you find interesting,
write research papers, and show everyone how smart you are. When
you are no longer a student, however, you have to support yourself in
the eyes of the institution, which means writing endless grant propos-
als and churning out papers for the main reason of getting tenure. You
end up spending 90 percent of your time not doing physics. I would
be busy working on physics all day while the other people in the lab
would be tearing their hair out writing grant proposals. I realized that
wasn't for me.
When did you first get interested in the market?
When I was growing up, I spent all my time thinking about math and
physics. I was a bit of a twisted kid. I started looking at the options
Q U E S T I O N I N G T H E O B V I O U S
market as early as high school because I thought it was a fun way to
apply the mathematics I was learning.
When did you start trading?
In my senior year of college. The thing that I liked about trading was
that the only limitation you had was yourself.
What did you trade?
Stocks and stock options on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.
How did you end up trading on the floor?
I had a friend who was a market maker. I went down to the floor with
him a few times and decided it was a perfect job for me. I had always
been interested in the markets and mathematics, and option trading
combined the two perfectly.
How did you get the money to trade when you first started out on
the floor of the exchange?
I was able to raise $80,000 from a few backers who were professional
gamblers. Because 1 was a serious Go and backgammon player, 1 had
met some of the world's best backgammon and poker players. One of
my investors had just won the World Series of poker and another
investor was one of the most successful backgammon players in
world.
What did they get for backing you?
Initially, 50 percent of my profits. I eventually bought them out.
There are a lot of similarities between gambling and trading, although
gambling is a bad term.
Because?
Because it implies that your results depend on luck. The people that
I'm talking about look at poker or backgammon as a business, not a
game of chance. There are a few things that are essential to success
in both trading as well as playing gambling games as a business. First,
you have to understand edge and maximize your edge. Second, you
have to be able to deal with losing. For example, a world-ranked
backgammon player could lose $100,000 to a total pigeon because of
bad luck. If that happens, he can't lose his head. He has to stay calm
and continue to do what he is supposed to be doing. Third, you have
to understand gambler's ruin—not playing too big for your bankroll.


--- PAGE 121 ---
J O H N B E N D E R
It might seem that if you have an edge, the way to maximize the
edge is to trade as big as you can. But that's not the case, because of
risk. As a professional gambler or as a trader, you are constantly walk-
ing the line between maximizing edge and minimizing your risk of
tapping out.
How do you decide what is the right balance?
There is no single right answer to that question. It depends on the
individual person's risk tolerance. Let's say you saved up enough
money to live out your life in relative comfort but without the ability
to make extravagant expenditures. I come along and offer to give
you ten-to-one odds on the flip of a coin. The only catch is that you
have to bet your entire net worth. That bet has a tremendous edge,
but it is probably a bet that you wouldn't want to make, because the
value of what you can gain, even though it is a much larger sum of
money, is much less than the value of what you could lose. If, how-
ever, you are just out of college with $10,000 in savings and your
whole earnings career ahead of you, you would probably want to
take the same bet. As a fund manager, the correct answer as to how
to maximize your edge will depend not only on your own risk char-
acteristics, but also on your perception of the risk profiles of your
investors-
How long did you trade on the floor of the Philadelphia stock
exchange?
Just over five years.
How did you do?
By the time 1 left, I had turned my initial $80,000 stake into over $7
million alter paying back my investors.
If you were doing so well, why did you leave the floor?
As I made more money, it became increasingly difficult to invest it
trading only two or three stocks; it made sense to go off the floor in
order to be able to diversify.
How have you been able to make such consistent gains trading
options?
To make money in options, you don't need to know what the price of
the stock is going to be; all you need to know is the probability distri-
bution [the probabilities of a stock being at different price levels at
the time of the option expiration].*
If the Almighty came to me and said, "I won't tell you where IBM
is going to be one month from now, but you've been a pretty good boy,
so I will give you the probability distribution," I could do the math—
and it's not very complicated math—and tell you exactly what every
option that expires on that date is worth. The problem is that the
Almighty is not giving me or anyone else the probability distribution
for the price of IBM a month from now.
The standard approach, which is based on the Black-Scholes for-
mula, assumes that the probability distribution will conform to a nor-
mal curve [the familiar bell-shaped curve frequently used to depict
probabilities, such as the probability distribution of IQ scores among
the population]. The critical statement is that it "assumes a normal
probability distribution." Who ran out and told these guys that was
the correct probability distribution? Where did they get this idea?
[The Black-Scholes formula (or one of its variations) is the widely used
equation for deriving an option's theoretical value. An implicit assump-
*A probability distribution is simply a curve that shows the probabilities of some event
occurring—in this case, the probabilities of a given stock being at any price on the
option expiration date. The x-axis (horizontal line) shows the price of the stock. The
y-axis (vertical line) shows the relative probability of the stock being at different
prices. The higher the curve at any price interval, the greater the probability that the
stock price will be in that range when the option expires. The area under the curve in
any price interval corresponds to the probability of the stock being in that range on
the option expiration date. For example, if 20 percent of the area under the curve lies
between 50 and 60, it implies that there is a 20 percent chance of the stock being
between 50 and 60 on the option expiration date. As another example, if 80 percent
of the area under the curve corresponds to prices under 60, the 60 call option, which
gives the holder the right to buy the stock at 60, would have an 80 percent chance of
expiring worthless.
The shape of the probability distribution curve, which is a snapshot of the proba-
bilities of prices being at different levels on the option expiration date, will determine
the option's value. The true shape of this curve is unknown, of course, and can only
be estimated. The assumptions made regarding the shape of this curve will be critical
in determining the value of an option. Two traders making different assumptions
about the shape of the probability distribution will come to two different conclusions
regarding an option's true value. A trader who is able to come up with a more accu-
rate estimate of the probability distribution would have a strong edge over other
traders.


--- PAGE 122 ---
J O H N B E N D E R
tion in the formula is that the probabilities of prices being at different
levels at the time of the option expiration can be described by a normal
curve*—the highest probabilities being for prices that are close to the
current level and the probabilities for any price decreasing the further
above or below the market it is.]
A normal distribution would be appropriate if stock price move-
ments were analogous to what is commonly called "the drunkard's
walk." If you have a drunkard in a narrow corridor, and all he can do is
lurch forward or backward, in order for his movements to be consid-
ered a random walk, the following criteria would have to be met:
1. He has to be equally likely to lurch forward as backward.
2. He has to lurch forward by exactly the same distance he lurches
backward.
3. He has to lurch once every constant time interval.
Those are pretty strict requirements. Not many variables meet
these conditions. Stock prices, I would argue, don't even come close
[substituting daily price changes for the drunkard's steps],
I don't mean to suggest that Black and Scholes made stupid
assumptions; they made the only legitimate assumptions possible, not
being traders themselves. In fact, they won the Nobel Prize for it.
Although, to be honest, that always seemed a bit strange to me
because all they used was high school mathematics. All my trading
operates on the premise that the most important part is the part that
Black-Scholes left out—the assumption of the probability distribution.
Why do you say with such assurance that stock prices don't even
come close to a random walk?
As one example, whether you believe in it or not, there is such a thing
as technical analysis, which tries to define support and resistance lev-
els and trends. Regardless of whether technical analysis has any valid-
ity, enough people believe in it to impact the market. For example, if
people expect a stock to find support at 65, lo and behold, they're
willing to buy it at 66. That is not a random walk statement.
*See note in final section of this chapter.
Q U E S T I O N I N G T H E O B V I O U S
I'll give you another example. Assume people get excited about
tech stocks for whatever reason and start buying them. Which funds
are going to have the best performance next quarter when mom-and-
pop public decide where to invest their money?—the tech funds.
Which funds are going to have the best inflows during the next quar-
ter?—the tech funds. What stocks are they going to buy?—not air-
lines, they're tech funds. So the tech funds will go up even more.
Therefore they're going to have better performance and get the next
allocation, and so on. You have all the ingredients for a trend. Again,
this is not price behavior that is consistent with a random walk
assumption.
You've seen this pattern increasingly in the recent run-up in the
U.S. stock market. The rampant uptrend has been fueled by constant
inflows into the same funds that are buying the same stocks, driving
these stocks to values that are ridiculous by any historical valuation.
[See Michael Lauer's interview for another perspective on this same
phenomenon.] You have stocks that have reproduction values of $20
million—someone's Web page system—trading at $ 1 billion or more.
Are they really worth that? I don't want to be the one to say no—after
all, they are trading there—but I think ultimately you're going to see
the same thing you saw with RCA during the TV boom: a run-up to
stratospheric levels and then a crash.
If these companies do their job right and the Internet is what it's
supposed to be, with every company having access to every customer,
they're going to be cutting one another's margins to the point where
very few companies will make much money. If you pick up an issue of
The New Yorker, you can find twenty ads for booksellers on the Inter-
net. It's a classic example of an industry with perfect competition.
There will be some exceptions because there are brand names and
some people will do their job better than others, but can the structure
support the valuations that are currently out there for the industry? I
doubt it.
Why are we seeing valuations for stocks that are so far above
their historical levels? Has something changed fundamentally?
Because of the repetitive cycle of price strength bringing in new buy-
ing, which causes more price strength. An important factor that has


--- PAGE 123 ---
JOilPBENDER
amplified the rally in the Internet stocks is the limited supply of
shares in these companies. Most Internet stocks float only about 20
percent or less of their shares.
Another major development during the past five to ten years has
been a substantial upward shift in the amount of money insurance
companies and pension funds allocate to stock investments. As hedge
fund managers, we think we are huge if we are trading one billion dol-
lars. That is nothing compared with insurance companies and pen-
sion funds that have assets of trillions of dollars.
If I understand you correctly, your basic premise is that stock
price movements are not random and therefore the assumption
that prices are normally distributed, which everyone uses to
determine option values, cannot be the accurate mathematical
representation of the true market. Does that imply that you've
come up with an alternative mathematical option pricing model?
Not in the sense that you are probably thinking. It's not a matter of
coming up with a one-size-fits-all model that is better than the stan-
dard Black-Scholes model. The key point is that the correct probability
distribution is different for every market and every time period. The
probability distribution has to be estimated on a case-by-case basis.
If your response to Bender's last comment, which challenges the core
premises assumed by option market participants, could best be summa-
rized as "Huh?," and assuming that you really care, then you should prob-
ably reread the explanation of probability distribution (footnote, page
227). In essence, Bender is saying that not only are conventional option
pricing models wrong because they make the unwarranted assumption
that prices are normally distributed, but the very idea that any single
model could be used to estimate option prices for different markets (or
stocks) is inherently wrong. Instead, it is necessary to use a different
model for every market (or stock).
How do you estimate the probability distribution?
By looking at everything from the fundamentals to technical factors to
who is doing what in the market. Each stock has its own probability
Q U E S T I O N I N G T H E OBfiflUS
distribution that depends on a host of factors: Who has what posi-
tion? Where did the major buyers accumulate their positions? Where
are their stop-loss points? What price levels are likely to be techni-
cally significant?
Can you get that type of information reliably?
I get that information off the floors in the case of stocks and stock
options and from the banks in the case of currencies.
How do you turn information like who is doing what into an
alternative option pricing model?
The best example I can think of involves the gold market rather than
stocks. Back in 1993, after a thirteen-year slide, gold rebounded above
the psychologically critical $400 level. A lot of the commodity trading
advisors [money managers in the futures markets, called CTAs for
short], who are mostly trend followers, jumped in on long side of gold,
assuming that the long-term downtrend had been reversed. Most of
these people use models that will stop out or reverse their long posi-
tions if prices go down by a certain amount. Because of the large num-
• her of CTAs in this trade and their stop-loss style of trading, I felt that
a price decline could trigger a domino-effect selling wave. I knew
from following these traders in the past that their stops were largely a
function of market volatility. My perception was that if the market-
went back down to about the $390 level, their stops would start to get
triggered, beginning a chain reaction.
I didn't want to sell the market at $405, which is where it was at
the time, because there was still support at $400. I did, however, feel
reasonably sure that there was almost no chance the market would
trade down to $385 without setting off a huge calamity. Why?
Because if the market traded to $385, you could be sure that the
stops would have started to be triggered. And once the process was
under way, it wasn't going to stop at $385. Therefore, you could afford
to put on an option position that lost money if gold slowly traded
down to $385-$390 and just sat there because it wasn't going to hap-
pen. Based on these expectations, I implemented a strategy that
would lose if gold declined moderately and stayed there, but would
make a lot of money if gold went down huge, and a little bit of money
if gold prices held steady or went higher. As it turned out, Russia


--- PAGE 124 ---
J O H N 
B E N D E R
announced they were going to sell gold, and the market traded down
gradually to $390 and then went almost immediately to $350 as each
stop order kicked off the next stop order.
The Black-Scholes model doesn't make these types of distinc-
tions. If gold is trading at $405, it assumes that the probability that it
will be trading at $360 a month from now is tremendously smaller
than the probability that it will be trading at $385. What I'm saying is
that under the right circumstances, it might actually be more likely
that gold will be trading at $360 than at $385. If my expectations,
which assume nonrandom price behavior, are correct, it will imply
profit opportunities because the market is pricing options on the
assumption that price movements will be random.
Could you give me a stock market example?
I'll give you a stock index example. Last year [1998], it was my belief
that stocks were trading on money inflows rather than their own
intrinsic fundamentals. IBM wasn't going up because the analysts
were looking at IBM and saying, "Here's the future earning stream
and we predict the price should rise to this level." IBM was going up
because people were dumping money into the market, and managers
were buying IBM and other stocks because they had to invest the
money somewhere.
A market that is driven by inflows can have small corrections, but
it has to then immediately recover to new highs to keep generating
new money inflows. Otherwise, money inflows are likely to dry up,
and the market will fall apart. Therefore, this type of market is likely
to either trend higher or break sharply. There is a much smaller-than-
normal chance that the market will go down 5 or 6 percent and stay
there. Based on this assumption, last year I implemented an option
strategy that would make a lot of money if the market went down big,
make a little bit if the market went up small, and lose a small amount
if the market went down small and stayed there. The market kept up
its relentless move upward for the first half the year, and I made a
small amount of money. Then the market had a correction and didn't
recover right away; the next stop was down 20 percent. I made an
enormous amount of money on that move.
t U E S T I O N I N G T H E O B V I O U S
Each of your examples has been very market specific. If I said to
you that you could come up with any alternative model you
wished instead of Black Scholes, but you had to apply it to all
markets, could you do any better than Black-Scholes?
No, given that restriction, the assumption that prices are random is as
good as any other assumption. However, just because Black and
Scholes used a one-size-fits-all approach doesn't mean it's correct.
Don't other firms such as Susquehanna [a company whose prin-
cipal was interviewed in The New Market Wizards] also trade on
models based on perceived mispricings implied by the standard
Black-Scholes model?
When I was on the floor of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, I was
typically trading on the other side of firms such as Susquehanna.
They thought they had something special because they were using a
pricing model that modified the Black-Scholes model. Basically, their
modifications were trivial.
I call what they were doing TV set—type adjustments. Let's say I
have an old-fashioned TV with an aerial. I turn it on, and the picture is
not quite right. I know it's supposed to be Mickey Mouse, but one ear
is fuzzy and he is a funny color green. What do I do? Do I sit down and
calculate where my aerial should be relative to the location of the
broadcast antenna? No, I don't do that. What I do is walk up to the TV,
whack it a couple of times, and twist the aerial. What am I doing? I'm
operating totally on feedback. I have never thought once about what is
really going on. All I do is twist the aerial until the picture looks like
what I think it should—until I see Mickey Mouse in all of his glory.
The market-making firms would make minor adjustments to the
Black-Scholes model—the same way I twisted the aerial to get
Mickey Mouse's skin color to be beige instead of green—until their
model showed the same prices that were being traded on the floor.
Then they would say, "Wow, we solved it; here is the model!" They
would use this model to print out option price sheets and send in a
bunch of kids, whom we called "sheet monkeys," to stand on the floor
and make markets. But did they ever stop to think about what the
right model would be instead of Black-Scholes?" No. They merely


--- PAGE 125 ---
J O H N B E N D F R
twisted the aerial on the TV set until the picture matched the picture
on the floor.
This approach may be okay if you are a market maker and all you
are trying to do is profit from the price spread between the bid and
the offer rather than make statements about which options are funda-
mentally overpriced or underpriced. As a trader, however, I'm trying to
put on positions that identify when the market is mispriced. I can't
use a model like that. I need to figure out fundamentally what the real
prices should be, not to re-create the prices on the floor.
Even though you manage a quarter of a billion dollars you seem
to keep an incredibly low profile. In fact, I've never seen your
name in print. Is this deliberate?
As a policy, I don't do interviews with the media.
Why is that?
My feeling is that it is very difficult for a money manager to give an
honest interview. Why would I want to be interviewed and tell the
world all my best investment ideas? Let's say I am a fund manager
and I have just identified XYZ as being the best buy around. Why
should I go on TV and announce that to the world? If I really believe
that is true, shouldn't I be buying the stock? And if I am buying it,
why would 1 want any competition?
Well, you may already be in the position.
Exactly. The only time anyone touts a position is when they have it on
and want to get out. When you turn on some financial TV program
and see someone tell you to buy a stock, there's a good chance he's
telling you to buy what he wants to sell. I've seen fund managers rec-
ommend the stock on TV and then seen their sell orders on the floor
the same day.
There is an alternative scenario. You could be bullish on XYZ and
have just bought your entire position. If that is the case, it would
be beneficial for you to have other people buying the stock, even
if you have no intention of selling it.
Isn't that also self-serving and unethical?
No, I would argue that if I own XYZ and want to get out of it, and
then I go on TV to tout the stock—that is unethical. But if I have
just bought XYZ and own all I want, and I am a long-term
Q U E S T I O N I N G THE OBttOUS
investor who doesn't intend to get out of the stock for another six
to eight months, I don't see anything wrong with recommending
the stock.
Maybe not in that case. But being on the floor, I've seen all sorts of
conflicts between trade recommendations and a firm's own trading
activity.
Such as?
I'll give you an example that is a matter of public record and involves
over-the-counter stocks—those total dens of thievery. It became rec-
ognized that some companies recommended stocks to their clients
and then sold the same stocks themselves all day long. Not only were
these firms the largest sellers of a stock on the day after they recom-
mended it, but they were also the largest buyers of the stock during
the preceding week. Here is how they explained it—I'm paraphrasing,
but I am not making any of this up: "These over-the-counter stocks
have very little liquidity. If we just recommend the stock, our clients
won't be able to buy it because the market will run away. Therefore
we have a to buy a few million shares of the stock before we recom-
mend it, so that when we do, we have supply to sell our customers."
The SEC, which looked into this practice, accepted their argument,
and they continue to do this. It's perfectly legal.
If you took the cynical attitude that all Wall Street recommenda-
tions are made to get the firm's large clients or the firm itself out of
positions, you would make money. I had a friend who made money
using exactly that strategy. In my own trading, when I am estimating
the price probability distribution for a stock, and a number of Wall
Street firms put out buy recommendations on that stock, it grossly
changes the probability distribution—the chances of that stock drop-
ping sharply become much larger.
Why is that?
If a bunch of brokerage firms recommend AOL, after two or three
weeks, we figure that everyone who wanted to buy the stock has
already bought it. That's the same reason why most fund managers
underperform the S&P: They buy the trendy stocks and the stocks
where all the good news is. The fact is that they may be buying a good
company, but they're getting it at a bad price. Conversely, when a


--- PAGE 126 ---
J O H N B E N D E R
stock gets hit by really bad news, and every analyst downgrades the
stock, it's probably a good buy. It may be a bad company, but you are
getting a good price—not necessarily right away, but after a few weeks
when all the selling on the news has taken place. It's not the current
opinion on the stock that matters, but rather the potential change in
the opinion.
It doesn't sound like you have a very high regard for Wall Street
analysts.
If you tune in CNBC and see a stock that has announced horrendous
earnings and is down 40 percent, the next morning, you'll see every
analyst on the Street dropping the stock from their recommended list.
Where were they the day before? Even though the news is already out
and the stock is down 40 percent in after-hours trading, they get
credit for recommending liquidation of the stock on the previous
day's close because the market hasn't officially opened yet. When you
look at their track record, it appears that they recommended liquidat-
ing the stock at $50, even though at the time, the stock was trading at
$30 in the off-the-Hoor market before the official exchange opening.
Conversely, if a stock announces good news, and the stock is trading
sharply higher before the official exchange opening, analysts can rec-
ommend a buy and get credit for issuing the recommendation on the
previous close.
Bender provides some very important insights for option traders,
and we'll get to those in a moment. But the most important message
of this chapter is: Don't accept anything; question everything. This
principle is equally relevant to all traders, and I suspect to all profes-
sions. The breakthroughs are made by those that question what is
obviously "true." As but one example, Before Einstein, the idea that
time was a constant seemed so apparent that the alternative was not
even considered. By questioning the obvious and realizing that the
accepted view had to be wrong (that is, time was variable and
dependent on relative velocity), Einstein made the greatest strides in
the history of science.
One of the basic tenets of option theory is that the probabilities of
BJIEST-IONIN6
different prices on a future date can be described by a normal
curve.* Many traders have tweaked this model in various ways. For
example, many option market participants have realized that rare
events (very large price increases and decreases, such as the October
19, 1987, stock market crash) were far more common in reality than
predicted by a normal curve and have adjusted the curve accordingly.
(They made the tails of the curve fatter.) Bender, however, has gone
much further. He has questioned the very premise of using a normal
curve as the starting point for describing prices. He has also ques-
tioned the convention of using a single model to describe the price
behavior—and by implication option prices—of different markets and
stocks. By ditching the concept that price movements behave in the
random fashion implicitly assumed by a normal distribution and by
dropping the assumption of a universal model, Bender was able to
derive much more accurate option pricing models.
Ideally, options should be used to express trades where the
trader's expectations differ from the theoretical assumptions of stan-
dard option pricing models. For example, if you believe that a given
stock has a chance that is much greater than normal of witnessing a
large, rapid price rise before the option expiration date, then pur-
chasing out-of-the-money call options might be a much better trade
(in terms of return versus risk) than buying the stock. (Out-of-the-
money call options are relatively cheap because they will only have
value at expiration if the stock price rises sharply.)
As another example, let's say there is an upcoming event for a
stock that has an equal chance of being bullish or bearish. But if it is
bullish, you expect that a large price rise will be more likely than a
moderate price rise. Standard option pricing models, of course,
*To be precise, the representation is a lognormal curve, which is a normal curve of the log
values of stock prices. In a lognormal curve, an increase by a factor x is considered as
likely as a decrease by a factor 1 /x. For example, if x = 1.25, a price increase by a fac-
tor of 1.25 (25 percent) is considered as likely as a price decrease by a factor of
1/1.25, or 0.80 (20 percent). The lognormal curve is a better fit than the normal
curve because prices can rise by any amount, but can decline only by 100 percent. If
applied to prices instead of the log of prices, the symmetry of a normal curve could
only be achieved by allowing for negative prices (an impossible event), which in fact
is what some early option theoreticians did.


--- PAGE 127 ---
assume that a moderate price rise is always more likely than a large
price rise. Insofar as your assumptions are correct and not already
discounted by prevailing option prices, it would be possible to con-
struct an option trade that would stack the odds in your favor. As one
example, you might sell at-the-money call options and use the pre-
mium collected to buy a much larger number of cheaper out-of-the-
money call options. This strategy will break even if prices decline,
lose moderately if prices rise a little, and win big if prices rise a lot.
The key to using options effectively is to sketch out your expecta-
tions of the probabilities of a stock moving to different price levels. If
these expectations differ from the neutral price assumptions that
underlie a normal distribution curve and standard option pricing
models, it implies that there are option strategies that offer a partic-
ularly favorable bet—assuming, of course, that your expectations
tend to be more accurate than random guesses.
CLAUDIO GUAZZONI
Eliminating the Downside
Sometimes you discover that your most firmly held convictions are wrong, or
at least subject to exceptions. One common flaw committed by investors
is that they chase recent performance, a tendency that results in the
largest investment inflows occurring at a manager's equity peaks and the
largest withdrawals near the equity lows. To counter this natural human
inclination toward poor investment timing, I have often counseled
investors to separate the processes of selecting and timing investments—
that is, to select the investment, but then wait for it to experience a
period of below-average performance before investing their funds. Any
prospective investor for Guazzoni's fund who followed this advice would
still be waiting on the sidelines. The fund has yet to register a losing
month. Returns have also been impressive, averaging 37 percent annual-
ized since the fund's launch date over five years ago.
Guazzoni's family emigrated from Italy when he was sixteen. Both his
parents are nuclear physicists (his mother was also an Olympic skier)
who were recruited by the U.S. Department of Defense as part of a clas-
sified cold war program, which Guazzoni explained was designed to har-
bor noteworthy European scientists in the United States, a very safe
distance from the Soviet Union's reach. Guazzoni, however, speaks Eng-
lish without any trace of an accent. He also speaks five other languages
fluently.
I arrived at our arranged meeting spot, the Yale Club reading room, at
the exact appointed time, 10 A.M. The cavernous room was virtually
deserted, and only a man and a woman immersed in an apparent busi-
239


--- PAGE 128 ---
CLAUDIfl3«!UAZZONJ
ness meeting occupied the quadrant of the room specified by Guazzoni
in his meeting instructions. I found a comfortable, aged leather sofa, and
while waiting for Guazzoni, I worked on the introduction for an interview
I had conducted the previous evening. The oversize dimensions of the
room, the furnishings, and the large oil canvases all combined to create
an aura of the early twentieth century. Even the ubiquitous ashtrays
served as a jarring anachronism.
I had expected Claudio Guazzoni to be a man in his fifties or sixties,
with neatly trimmed hair, and wearing a finely tailored suit. Perhaps this
mental image was fostered by my preconceptions of what the principal of
a European-named investment firm would look like. I was therefore sur-
prised when 1 was approached by a man in his thirties, sporting a goatee
and a ponytail.
I latter learned that Guazzoni's choice of hairstyle had an unusual ori-
gin. In Milan, where Guazzoni was born, it is customary for men to give
their new wives jewelry as a wedding present. In line with this tradition,
he took his fiancee to Harry Winston, one of Manhattan's most exclusive
jewelry stores, and asked her to choose whatever she desired. After an
hour of looking at and trying on different items, his fiancee, who is not
overly keen on material possessions, made Guazzoni a deal he couldn't
refuse. "Look," she said, "purchasing an extravagant piece of jewelry
requires little effort on your part; instead, how about allowing your hair to
grow, promising me not to cut it for two years'?" Guazzoni could not
refuse.
Guazzoni explained how his longer hair affected the way people
responded to him at business meetings. Apparently, it placed Internet
company entrepreneurs at ease, but more traditional corporate types and
investment bankers often ended up directing their conversation at Guaz-
zoni's subordinates. "Ever since I've grown my hair," he said, "I get a lot
more time to sit back and listen at meetings. It's actually been very help-
ful to be more of an observer."
We began the interview in the reading room and continued it several
hours later in the dining room, seated at a sun-drenched table that over-
looked Grand Central Station.
E L I M I N A T I N G T H E D O W N S I D E
In our interview, don't be concerned about censoring what you
might say, because I will give you a chance to review your quotes
before the book is printed.
Actually, anything I say, you can print, because I never have done any-
thing in my life that I am ashamed of. We are not rocket scientists.
Some people like to complicate things through fancy formulas and
black boxes, but what we do is very simple.
How so?
We simply judge people's characters and their abilities to get them-
selves out of trouble.
By people, do you mean CEOs?
The CEOs and other top management. Judging a person's character
and ability to get himself out of a box is more of an inherent trait then
an acquired skill.
In other words, what you're doing is very qualitative instead of
quantitative.
Extremely so. We judge a person's character. As one example, we look
for people who don't cheat on their wives.
How would you know that? I'm assuming you don't hire detec-
tives to trail the CEOs when you are considering a prospective
investment.
Assume you are at a restaurant with a CEO, discussing the outlook of
his company, and an attractive woman walks by. If his attention is no
longer focused on you, then. . . . Also, a lot of people will freely boast
about their escapades. My attitude is that if someone will cheat on
his wife, then he will cheat on me too.
Are you seeking out companies that are in trouble?
Not at all! Eighty percent of the business we do is acquisition finance.
Define that for me.
Notwithstanding the mature state of the U.S. economy, small pockets
of industries still exist that are very fragmented with lots of so-called
mom-and-pops. In certain of these industries, consolidators have nat-
urally developed to purchase and roll up these mom-and-pops as part
of a larger nationwide group.
Can you give me an example of one of these companies.
We currently have thirteen companies in our portfolio, and each of


--- PAGE 129 ---
C L A U D I O 6UAZZONI1
them is a consolidator in a particular industry group. One example is
a firm that consolidates the hearing aid industry. As a bit of back-
ground, among people over sixty, only one-third of those who need
hearing aids wear them. In the under-sixty category, about 10 to 15
percent of the population needs hearing aids because of damage
caused by loud rock concerts and Walkman players, but virtually no
one in this age group wears them. A sizable stigma still exists, similar
to eyeglasses in the 1950s or 1960s. Although there is a huge market
potential, hearing aids are distributed in a very haphazard and frag-
mented manner. There are one or two large corporations that in my
opinion are less than ethical—I'm sure you've seen their ads on late-
night television. The bulk of the industry, however, consists of small-
scale mom-and-pop shops, which have one or two primary brands of
hearing devices that they push.
The CEO of our consolidator wants to become the Pearle Vision
of hearing aids. He is rolling up mom-and-pop outlets and standard-
izing the stores. He makes sure that there is a hearing doctor at each
location, just as there is an ophthalmologist at each Pearle Vision
site. When he buys a hearing aid retailer, he gives them shares in the
company and puts them through a rigorous corporate training pro-
gram. The end result is that it doesn't matter whether a customer
goes to one of the company's stores in Manhattan or Palm Beach. In
either case, the service will be the same, and there will be a choice of
forty models, including ones in bold colors and computerized ver-
sions.
Could you term this type of approach as reverse franchising, in
the sense that existing outlets are being consolidated into a
chain?
Not exactly, because the stores are owned by the company.
What's the advantage of converting existing stores instead of just
opening new ones?
This process retains customers and eliminates competition.
Is this a new type of approach to forming a chain business?
It's relatively new, although Pearle Vision and LensCrafters consoli-
dated the eyeglass industry some time ago.
E L I M I N A T I N G T H E
How do you enter into the equation?
We finance the acquisitions. At times, we also identify and negotiate
the acquisitions.
How is what you do different from venture capital?
The companies we invest in are already listed on a stock exchange,
whereas venture capitalists typically come in at a much earlier stage.
Although the companies already exist, they need money to grow. We
finance their expansion, and in return they give us privately placed
equity.
Obviously, they're not just giving you equity at the market price.
There must be some beneficial structure.
The deals are very structured, with our returns guaranteed by the
company. As long as the company stays in business, we are assured a
minimum preferred return on equity of between 10 and 20 percent. If
the company does well, our upside is heavily skewed.
How are these guarantees achieved?
We use half a dozen different types of proprietary structures, but in
all these variations, as long as the company stays in business, our
returns are preferred* and guaranteed.
So even if the company stock is $ 10 when you make the deal and
it goes down to $5, you still make a minimum return?
Seven dollars, $5, or $3, our returns are still the same. If, however,
the stock goes from $10 to $15, we share in a large portion of the
upside. And from $ 15 to $20, we might share in an even larger por-
tion of the upside.
Why would a company raise money by doing a guaranteed deal
with you instead of borrowing money from a bank at a fixed rate?
We compete with banks all the time, but there are many reasons why
companies come to us. Sometimes a bank may be willing to give a
company a partial loan but want them to raise an equity cushion else-
where. For example, one of the companies we invested in is a consol-
idator in the home alarm industry. They needed $22 million to
*Preferred stock takes precedence over common stock in respect to dividend payments
and asset distribution in the event of liquidation.


--- PAGE 130 ---
C L A U D i O •fiUA.ZZOINl
finance the simultaneous acquisition of three separate targets. The
bank offered to lend them $15 million provided they were able to find
the remaining $7 million elsewhere. We were the ones who provided
that additional financing. Also banks are very bureaucratic and take
two or three months to approve loans. If necessary, we can work
twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week to make a deal happen
quickly. We have provided $10 million to $1 5 million to companies in
as little as five days.
Why would a consolidator have such a great urgency for funds?
Couldn't they just wait the two or three months for the bank to
approve the loan?
Sometimes they think they're going to get a bank loan, and then just
when they need the funds for an acquisition, the loan falls through. A
CEO may play golf with his banker every Sunday and be told that
everything is fine with his loan application. Then at the last moment,
the banker's boss doesn't approve the loan. It happens all the time.
That's where we come into the picture. We not only provide money in
a timely manner, but we also offer strategic help to a company. In a
sense, we become partners with the companies we invest in.
Exactly what kind of strategic help do you provide?
As an example, one of the companies in our current portfolio is a con-
solidator in the temporary jobs field. Their specialty is hiring out very
highly skilled computer technicians. They might pay their temporary
workers $50 to $75 an hour, and then book them out at $150 to $175
an hour. First, we financed a few of their acquisitions, and then we
brought them two acquisition candidates that we had found, negoti-
ated the transactions, funded them, and caused the transactions to
happen.
Given the way you structure your deals, is there any way you
could lose money as long as the company you invest in doesn't go
bankrupt?
Yes . . . [sighing] One risk we have identified is what we call the "just-
say-no risk"—the company refuses to honor the documents they
signed. As an actual example, one company to whom we had loaned
$2 million paid it all back with the exception of the final $50,000.
The new CEO, just appointed by the company's board of directors,
ILIMINATJNfi T H E DOWISIDE
said to us, "You made a lot of money on the deal. You should be happy.
Now, just go away." Well, we had made a lot of money on this transac-
tion, but we didn't go away, because we had to protect our record that
we would never allow something like this to happen without a pro-
tracted struggle.
It sounds as if it would have cost you more than $50,000 to liti-
gate the case.
It cost us two years in time and $139,000 in legal fees. But we ended
up winning $1.3 million because of all the penalties the company
incurred.
What was your major in college?
I studied dual fields: comparative literature and economics.
What attracted you to comparative literature?
The origin of languages. I was fascinated by the process in which a
language evolved to become another language.
For example?
Latin was the language spoken by the most powerful people of its
time, similar to the standing of English today, and then it became six
different languages. I was intrigued by how time shaped a language—
particularly everyday words, or words used to express love, anger, or
any other types of passionate feeling, because these are the words
that evolve most rapidly.
Did you have any career goals when you were in college?
No, I did not. I started out postcollege life as a photographer.
That has nothing to do with either economics or literature. How
did that evolve?
It was a passion. I was probably influenced by my mother, who does
large-format photography—in the style of Ansel Adams.
What kind of photography did you do?
Primarily photography of architecture and some portraiture work, but
from the vantage point of looking at people as architecture rather
than as personalities. In the early 1980s, I had a show in the East Vil-
lage, which went quite well. However, then the gallery owner had
requests from clients who wanted me to photograph certain subjects
according to their specifications—for example, to match their sofa, or
something equally as ridiculous.


--- PAGE 131 ---
UA-UDIWWHM
I decided if my reason for working was to make money, I might as
well go into business. I had a friend who worked at an investment
bank. He said, "You speak five languages; they need people like you."
I interviewed with a number of investment banks and chose to accept
a very lucrative offer from Salomon Brothers. This was before the
term "investment banker" became a household word.
So you ended up in the financial arena simply because you had a
friend who suggested the idea; it was not something you had
thought about.
At the time, I didn't have any real plans. Initially, 1 looked at the job as
a way of paying for my photography [he laughs].
When you started at Salomon, you had no experience whatsoever
in the financial markets. What did they have you do?
1 started out in a training program for the bond department.
What year?
1985.
That sounds as if you must have been at Salomon Brothers dur-
ing the same general period described in Liar's Poker. What did
you think of that book?
I'd rather not comment on that.
Why is that?
Michael Lewis worked with me, and I. prefer to leave that particular
subject out of this interview.
It's a very well-written book.
Yes, it's a very entertaining book.
Entertaining as a laudatory adjective or as a left-handed compli-
ment, denoting less than factual?
It accurately describes Salomon Brothers at the time, but I believe it
inaccurately describes Michael's particular role at Salomon Brothers.
What is the training experience at Salomon like?
I don't know what it's like now, but at the time it was a very rigorous
boot camp where people had to make the grade every week or else
they were thrown out. The training program was six months long,
with the mornings spent in classroom sessions, and the afternoons
helping out at the trading desks.
E L I M I N A T I N G T H E D O W N S I D E
How were the classroom sessions different from school?
School is a lot more relaxed. These people were paying you $50,000 a
year to learn at a time when $50,000 was a lot of money and other
college graduates were earning $18,000.
Did they use textbooks?
Textbooks and about a foot-high folder of in-house papers. Each man-
ager on the trading floor had two or three days with the training class,
and each of these departmental training sessions had a lot of text
associated with it. Tests were given at the end of each session.
What was your own experience at Salomon?
It was a very awakening experience for me.
In what way?
Here I was, a photographer, an artist, being thrown into a world of
very savvy, streetwise, money-oriented people—a world in which
everything was about how much you made by the end of the day.
Everything was measured in dollars and cents.
As an artistic soul, how do you find comfort in that type of envi-
ronment?
It fascinated me because I was exposed to personalities with whom I
had never dealt before. They looked at life in a very different way. If
the price of something was right, they bought it, whether they needed
it or not. I never bought things I didn't need. I never thought about
price too much. It took me a year to really "get it," which is probably
about six months longer than anyone else in my class.
By "get it," do you mean the culture?
The culture; the bottom-line, ring-the-cash-register mentality.
What was your job after you completed the training course?
They sent me to the London office because I was multilingual. I was
assigned to the government bond department.
Was the trading you were involved in directional or market-
making in nature?
Basically market-making in government securities and options.
Although we did make money for the firm, our primary objective was
to provide liquidity for our customers overseas and our domestic cus-
tomers during time zones not covered by New York.


--- PAGE 132 ---
CLAUD'10 GUAZZOiNI
How long were you at the government bond desk in London?
Three years, and then I transferred to Salomon's merger and acquisi-
tion department in NYC.
Why did you leave the bond department?
The focus was very narrow. I wanted to learn more about companies
and industries. At the time, a lot of people were having great success
in the realm of leveraged buyouts, and I wanted to learn more about
that side of business. I was eventually hired by an LBO firm, run by a
client of Salomon who had his own company that did leveraged buy-
outs.
Exactly how does a leveraged buyout work?
At certain times, some companies may be trading well below their
replacement value. In other words, the assets of the company are
worth more than its aggregate share price.
Does that happen very often?
Well it happened frequently in the early-to-mid-1980s. Usually the
companies involved were very boring—for example, a company that
made steel shelving and had made steel shelving for the past fifty
years. The basic idea was that a loan could be obtained against the
company's cash flow. Let's say the company's cash flow was $10 mil-
lion a year. Based on that cash flow, you could get a loan that required
a $7 million annual interest payment, implying a total loan of any-
where between $90 to 100 million at the prevailing interest rate of
the time.
So the basic plan was to repay the loan from the company's
cash flow.
Yes, but then you had to run the company correctly. Once you had
the loan commitment, you could go to the shareholder owners and try
to buy the company for $110 to 120 million. If they agreed, you
would buy the company with a loan from the bank and a very thin
slice of equity from investors. After ten or fifteen years, you would
own the complete company by having used the company's own
money.
I was particularly attracted to the concept of buying undervalued
assets, which I became aware was not something that was confined to
just leveraged buyouts. Every period of time has its own opportunities
E L I M I N A T I N G THE 1WISIDE
where one can find investments that are extremely discounted and
have a very well protected downside.
At Salomon Brothers, I had gotten to know Lewis Ranieri, who
left before I did. Ranieri taught me there is no reason to buy things at
retail. Anything sold out there you can buy at half price. Everything,
everything out there. Besides the hype and fancy shopping bag, what
is the reason for buying something at a Madison Avenue boutique?
There is none. It's just a trick to separate you from your money. The
same thing is true in the stock market. Why would people buy Inter-
net stocks at such crazy levels? It's just hype to trick people out of
their money. At the time, Ranieri was heavily involved in buying
assets being liquidated by the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The Resolution Trust Corporation was created by Congress in
1989 to dispose of the assets of failed savings and loans institutions in
the wake of widespread bank failures. Ironically, the banking crisis was
precipitated by Congress's earlier deregulation of the industry (1982),
which opened the door to reckless investments and pervasive fraud.
Congress exacerbated the impact of this ill-advised legislation by
blocking attempts by regulators to rein in the industry and repeatedly
ignoring their dire warnings—until the problem became so huge that
it could no longer be avoided. There is ample evidence that political
contributions from the industry heavily influenced Congress's disas-
trous policy. Estimates suggest that the bailout necessitated by this
political fiasco cost U.S. taxpayers as much as one-half trillion dollars.
Many of the banks had been very sloppy and hadn't kept good
records. Much of the loan documentation was either faulty or miss-
ing. You were asked to place a bid on a loan portfolio, with a face
value of say $100 million, without having any solid idea what was in
the portfolio. At the beginning, these offerings attracted very little
interest. Some of these loan portfolios could be had for a bid as low as
10 cents on the dollar. Then you would spend many months going
through the documents and discover that the loans were actually
worth 60 cents on the dollar. There was a very large profit opportunity


--- PAGE 133 ---
CLAWiiiliiliON'l
for limited amounts of risk. As time went on, however, interest in
these loan portfolios built up dramatically, and eventually the winning
bids were as high as 80 cents on the dollar. 1 was fascinated that at
the early stages, the transactions were being clone at levels that
allowed for a very wide margin of error. The downside was protected.
How was the downside protected?
When you are bidding 10 or 20 on a loan portfolio that supposedly
had a value of 100 just twelve months prior, it's hard to go very far
wrong, although it was possible to lose money if you bought a portfo-
lio constructed by fools or crooks, which sometimes was the case.
Did you get involved in buying RTC loans?
No. I spent a lot of time looking into it while I was at that LBO firm, but
to my disillusionment, nothing ever came of it. That was part of the rea-
son why I left to go off on my own. Besides being severely undercom-
pensated, 1 was frustrated by having identified a number of
opportunities where we could have made large profits with what 1 had
believed to be limited risk, and yet nothing was ever allowed to be clone.
By the time I left the LBO firm, it was too late to start bidding for
RTC loans, because they had attracted too much interest, and the
winning bids were 60 cents, 70 cents, or 80 cents on the dollar,
instead of the original 10 or 20 cents. The profit opportunities with
low risk were gone. Also, I didn't have enough funds to participate in
the RTC loans. I started looking for other investment opportunities
that in my opinion had very limited risk.
What other strategies did you come up with?
At the time, there were many CEOs who owned a lortune in their
own company stock, but who could not sell any part of their holdings
on the open market due to restrictions. I thought I could buy it pri-
vately for 50 cents on the dollar.
Why couldn't they sell their stock?
Because their company had just done an initial public offering (IPO)
and the stock was restricted [senior management and board members
were prohibited from selling their shares on the open market for a
specified period]. Purchasing restricted stock privately at a discount
represented another form of the same idea that so attracted me—buy-
ing an asset for a lot less than what I perceived the true value to be.
E L I M I N A T I N G THE flHmiDE
Why could they sell their shares to you?
Because it was a private transaction, and I took on the restriction. I
couldn't sell the stock until the restriction period was over. I could go
to an executive in Silicon Valley and say, "On paper you are worth $20
million, but you can't sell any of your shares. I'll pay you $ 1 million for
$2 million of restricted stock." Remember, restrictions back then
were as long as three years.
How did you find managers who wanted to sell restricted stock at
discounted levels?
Management and other insiders have to file SEC forms every year
showing ownership. 1 periodically searched through these filings.
Then I would call a manager and make a proposal to him: "I see that
you own 50 percent of your company. Would you be interested in
cashing out on a small part of it?" Some of them would be.
I assume many of them would say yes but then would lose their
enthusiasm once you told them that you were offering them only
50 cents on the dollar.
I was usually buying only a small piece of their holdings. Look, imag-
ine you have a company that has just had an IPO. All of a sudden you
have $20 million on paper, and you're still living in a $500,000 house.
Well, maybe you might be very happy to trade $2 million of stock that
you can't sell for three years for $1 million in hand.
How did you get the money to buy the stock?
At first, I did these transactions on a deal-by-deal basis, and I prima-
rily raised the money from relatives and friends of relatives.
Is buying restricted stock still one of the strategies you're using
today?
No, because the SEC has since changed the rules: The restricted
lockup period is now only one year. The discount available on
restricted stock has shrunk commensurately.
Was the shift in your current strategy prompted by this change in
the required holding period for restricted stock?
Even before this change, I wasn't fully satisfied. If the company
whose shares we bought had problems, we could still lose. I was
searching for what I call a full "belt-and-suspenders" strategy. How
could I structure a transaction so that if a stock were to go down 50


--- PAGE 134 ---
C L A U D 10
percent due to a market correction, 1 would still come out
unscathed?
How did you do that?
I would ask the company owner if he thought his stock could go down
50 percent. "Of course not," he would answer, "it's going to triple." I
said, "Fine, I'll give you 60 cents on the dollar instead of 50 cents, but
if the stock goes down 40 percent, you give me more shares." That
was the beginning of our protecting the downside.
Did they usually accept this type of deal?
Sure, no entrepreneur will ever think his stock is going down.
There is a common belief that Market Wizards tend to have been
obsessed with the markets from an early age. This is often not the
case. Guazzoni's early interests— photography and the origin of lan-
guages—were as removed as could be from the financial sphere. He
fell into a financial career only because of a friend's suggestion.
Although Claudio Guazzoni's approach, which requires tens of
millions of dollars to implement, is hardly accessible to the average
investor, it is important to remember that his firm did not spring
forth full-blown. He started out with a simple idea—buying
restricted stock at a discounted price—and built his enterprise one
deal at a time, with his initial stake raised from others. The perti-
nence of this chapter to investors is not Guazzoni's methodology, but
rather his premise that "every period of time has its own opportuni-
ties where you can find investments that are extremely discounted
and have a very well protected downside."
Guazzoni's strategy of buying restricted stock provides a perfect
illustration of the principle that opportunities arise when some mar-
ket participants are treated differently from others. (See the
Alphonse Fletcher Jr. interview for a further elaboration of this
theme.) In this case, the owners of restricted stock were prohibited
from selling their shares, whereas ordinary investors were not. This
dichotomy in the treatment of shareholders provided the opportunity
for Guazzoni to buy restricted shares at deep discounts. It may have
been a very simple idea—as Guazzoni himself readily characterizes
iELIMI'NATING T«llffWNSIDE
his strategies at the beginning of this interview—but still a highly
profitable one. The lesson is that complexity is not a necessary ingre-
dient for success.
Guazzoni's entire career has one unifying theme: the search for
undervalued assets. All the strategies he worked on or utilized—
leveraged buyouts, bids on RTC loan portfolios, discounted pur-
chases of restricted stock, and acquisition finance—involved buying
undervalued assets. The idea of buying assets at prices below their
true value as a means of not only generating profits, but also doing so
with very limited downside risk, is a concept that runs through a
number of interviews in this book (for example, Michael Lauer's
stock buying strategy). When asked to summarize his philosophy,
Guazzoni replied: "We try to eliminate the downside. If you eliminate
the downside, you end up making money at the end of the year."


--- PAGE 135 ---
DAVID SHAW
The Quantitative Edge
In offices Situated on the upper floors of a Midtown Manhattan skyscraper,
Shaw has assembled scores of the country's most brilliant mathemati-
cians, physicists, and computer scientists with one purpose in mind: to
combine their quantitative skills to consistently extract profits from the
world's financial markets. Employing a myriad of interrelated, complex
mathematical models, the firm, D. E. Shaw, trades thousands of stocks in
more than ten countries, as well as financial instruments linked to these
stock markets (warrants, options, and convertible bonds). The company
seeks to profit strictly from pricing discrepancies among different securi-
ties, rigorously avoiding risks associated with directional moves in the
stock market or other financial markets (currencies and interest rates).
Shaw's secretiveness regarding his firm's trading strategies is leg-
endary. Employees sign nondisclosure agreements, and even within the
firm, knowledge about the trading methodology is on a need-to-know
basis. Thus, in my interview, I knew better than to even attempt to ask
Shaw explicit questions about his company's trading approach. Still, I
tried what I thought were some less sensitive questions:
> What strategies were once used by the firm but have been dis-
carded because they no longer work?
> What fields of math would one have to know to develop the same
strategies his firm uses?
*• What market anomalies that once provided trading opportunities
have so obviously ceased to exist that all his competitors would be
aware of the fact?
Even these circumspect questions were met with a polite refusal to
254
Iff HE Q.UANTI.TATiHMDiB-t
answer. Although he did not use these exact words, the gist of Shaw's
responses to these various queries could be succinctly stated as: "I prefer
not to answer on the grounds that it might provide some remote hint that
my competitors could find useful."
Shaw's flagship trading program has been consistently profitable since
it was launched in 1989. During its eleven-year life span, the program
has generated a 22 percent average annual compounded return net of all
fees while keeping risks under tight control. During this entire period,
the program's worst decline from an equity peak to a month-end low was
a relatively moderate 11 percent—and even this loss was fully recovered
in just over four months.
How has D. E. Shaw managed to extract consistent profits from the
market for over a decade in both bullish as well as bearish periods?
Clearly, Shaw is not talking—or at least not about the specifics of his
company's trading strategies. Nevertheless, based on what Shaw does
acknowledge and reading between the lines, it may be possible to sketch a
very rough description of his company's trading methodology. The follow-
ing explanation, which admittedly incoq^orates a good deal of guesswork,
is intended to provide the reader with a flavor of Shaw's trading approach.
We begin our overview with classic arbitrage. Although Shaw doesn't
use classic arbitrage, it provides a conceptual starting point. Classic arbi-
trage refers to the risk-free trade of simultaneously buying and selling the
same security (or commodity) at different prices, therein locking in a
risk-free profit. An example of classic arbitrage would be buying gold in
New York at $290 an ounce and simultaneously selling the same quantity
in London at $291. In our age of computerization and near instantaneous
communication, classic arbitrage opportunities are virtually nonexistent.
Statistical arbitrage expands the classic arbitrage concept of simulta-
neously buying and selling identical financial instruments for a locked-in
profit to encompass buying and selling closely related financial instru-
ments for a probable profit. In statistical arbitrage, each individual trade
is no longer a sure thing, but the odds imply an edge. The trader engaged
in statistical arbitrage will lose on a significant percentage of trades but
will be profitable over the long run, assuming trade probabilities and
transaction costs have been accurately estimated. An appropriate analogy
would be roulette (viewed from the casino's perspective): The casino's


--- PAGE 136 ---
DAVID S H A W :
odds of winning on any particular spin of the wheel are only modestly
better than fifty-fifty, but its edge and the laws of probability will assure
that it wins over the long run.
There are many different types of statistical arbitrage. We will focus
on one example: pairs trading. In addition to providing an easy-to grasp
illustration, pairs trading has the advantage of reportedly being one of the
prime strategies used by the Morgan Stanley trading group, for which
Shaw worked before he left to form his own firm.
Pairs trading involves a two-step process. First, past data are used to
define pairs of stocks that tend to move together. Second, each of these
pairs is monitored for performance divergences. Whenever there is a sta-
tistically meaningful performance divergence between two stocks in a
defined pair, the stronger of the pair is sold and the weaker is bought.
The basic assumption is that the performance of these closely related
stocks will tend to converge. Insofar as this theory is correct, a pairs trad-
ing approach will provide an edge and profitability over the long run,
even though there is a substantial chance that any individual trade will
lose money.
An excellent description of pairs trading and the testing of a specific
strategy was contained in a 1999 research paper written by a group of
Yale School of Management professors.* Using data for 1963-97, they
found that the specific pairs trading strategy they tested yielded statisti-
cally significant profits with relatively low volatility. In fact, for the
twenty-five-year period as a whole, the pairs trading strategy had a higher
return and much lower risk (volatility) than the S&P 500. The pairs trad-
ing strategy, however, showed signs of major deterioration in more recent
years, with near-zero returns during the last four years of the survey
period (1994-97). A reasonable hypothesis is that the increased use of
pairs-based strategies by various trading firms (possibly including
Shaw's) drove down the profit opportunity of this tactic until it was virtu-
ally eliminated.
What does Shaw's trading approach have to do with pairs trading?
Similar to pairs trading, Shaw's strategies are probably also based on a
* Evan G. Gatev, William N. Goetzmann, and K. Geert Rouwenhort. Pairs Trading: Perfor-
mance of a Relative Value Arbitrage Rule. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 7032; March 1999.
f HE Q U A N T I T A T I V E 
EDGE
structure of identifying securities that are underpriced relative to other
securities. However, that is where the similarity ends. A partial list of the
elements of complexity that differentiate Shaw's trading methodology
from a simple statistical arbitrage strategy, such as pairs trading, include
some, and possibly all, of the following:
Trading signals are based on over twenty different predictive tech-
niques, rather than a single method.
Each of these methodologies is probably far more sophisticated than
pairs trading. Even if performance divergence between correlated
securities is the core of one of these strategies, as it is for pairs trad-
ing, the mathematical structure would more likely be one that simul-
taneously analyzes the interrelationship of large numbers of
securities, rather than one that analyzes two stocks at a time.
Strategies incorporate global equity markets, not just U.S. stocks.
Strategies incorporate equity related instruments—warrants, options,
and convertible bonds—in addition to stocks.
In order to balance the portfolio so that it is relatively unaffected by
the trend of the general market, position sizes are probably adjusted
to account for factors such as the varying volatility of different securi-
ties and the correlations among stocks in the portfolio.
The portfolio is balanced not only to remove the influence of price
moves in the broad stock market, but also to mitigate the influence of
currency price swings and interest rate moves.
Entry and exit strategies are employed to minimize transaction costs.
All of these strategies and models are monitored simultaneously in
real time. A change in any single element can impact any or all of the
other elements. As but one example, a signal by one predictive tech-
nique to buy a set of securities and sell another set of securities
requires the entire portfolio to be rebalanced.
The trading model is dynamic—that is, it changes over time to adjust
for changing market conditions, which dictate dropping or revising
some predictive techniques and introducing new ones.
I have no idea—and for that matter will never know—how close the
foregoing description is to reality. I think, however, that it is probably


--- PAGE 137 ---
D A V I D S H A W
valid as far as providing a sense of the type of trading done at D. E.
Shaw.
Shaw's entrepreneurial bent emerged at an early age. When he was
twelve, he raised a hundred dollars from his friends to make a horror
movie. Since he grew up in the E.A. area, he was able to get other kids'
parents to provide free help with tasks such as special effects and edit-
ing. The idea was to show the movie to other kids in the neighborhood
for a 50-cent admission charge. But the plan went awry when the pro-
cessing lab lost one of the rolls of film. When he was in high school, he
formed a company that manufactured and sold psychedelic ties. He
bought three sewing machines and hired high school students to manu-
facture the ties. The venture failed because he hadn't given much
thought to distribution, and going from store to store proved to be an
inefficient way to market the ties.
His first serious business venture, however, was a success. While he
was at graduate school at Stanford, he took two years off to start a com-
puter company that developed compilers [computer code that translates
programs written in user languages into machine language instructions].
Although this venture was very profitable, Shaw's graduate school
adviser convinced him that it was not realistic for him to earn his Ph.D.
part-time while running a company. Shaw sold the company and com-
pleted his Ph.D. work at Stanford. He never considered the alternative
of staying with his entrepreneurial success and abandoning his immedi-
ate goal of getting a Ph.D. "Finishing graduate school was extremely
important to me at the time," he says. "To be taken seriously in the
computer research community, you pretty much had to be a faculty
member at a top university or a Ph.D.-level scientist at a leading
research lab."
Shaw's doctoral dissertation, "Knowledge Based Retrieval on a Rela-
tional Database Machine," provided the theoretical basis for building
massively parallel computers. One of the pivotal theorems in Shaw's dis-
sertation proved that, for an important class of problems, the theoretical
advantage of a multiple processor computer over a single processor com-
puter would increase in proportion to the magnitude of the problem. The
implications of this theorem for computer architecture were momentous:
It demonstrated the inevitability of parallel processor design vis-a-vis sin-
T H E Q U A N T I T A T I V E EDff
gle processor design as the approach lor achieving major advances in
supercomputer technology.
Shaw has had enough accomplishments to fulfill at least a half dozen
extraordinarily successful careers. In addition to the core trading busi-
ness, Shaw's firm has also incubated and spun off a number of other
companies. Perhaps the best-known of these is Juno Online Services, the
world's second-largest provider of dial-up Internet sendees (after America
Online). Juno was launched as a public company in May 1999 and is
traded on Nasdaq (symbol: JWEB). D. E. Shaw also developed DESoFT,
a financial technology company, which was sold to Merrill Lynch, an
acquisition that was pivotal to the brokerage firm's rollout of an on-line
trading service. FarSight, an on-line brokerage firm, and D. E. Shaw
Financial Products, a market-making operation, were other businesses
developed at D. E. Shaw and subsequently sold.
In addition to spawning a slew of successful companies, D. E. Shaw
also has provided venture capital funding to Schrodinger Inc. (for which
Shaw is the chairman of the board of directors) and Molecular Simula-
tions Inc., two firms that are leaders in the development of computa-
tional chemistry software. These investments reflect Shaw's strong belief
that the design of new drugs, as well as new materials, will move increas-
ingly from the laboratory to the computer. Shaw predicts that develop-
ments in computer hardware and software will make possible a dramatic
acceleration in the timetable for developing new drugs, and he wants to
play a role in turning this vision into reality.
By this time, you may be wondering how this man finds time to sleep.
Well, the paradox deepens, because in addition to all these ventures,
Shaw has somehow found time to pursue his political interests by serving
on President Clinton's Committee of Advisors on Science and Technol-
ogy and chairing the Panel on Educational Technology.
The reception area at D. E. Shaw—a sparsely furnished, thirty-one-
foot cubic space, with diverse rectangular shapes cut out of the walls and
backlit by tinted sunlight reflected off of hidden color surfaces—looks
very much like a giant exhibit at a modern art museum. This bold, spar-
tan, and futuristic architectural design is, no doubt, intended to project
the firm's technological identity.
The interview was conducted in David Shaw's office, a spacious,


--- PAGE 138 ---
D A V I D SHAW-3
high-ceilinged room with two adjacent walls of windows opening to an
expansive view to the south and west of Midtown Manhattan. Shaw
must be fond of cacti, which lined the windowsills and included a tree-
size plant in the corner of the room. A large, irregular-polygon-shaped,
brushed aluminum table, which served as a desk on one end and a con-
ference area on the other, dominated the center of the room. We sat
directly across from each other at the conference end.
You began your career designing supercomputers. Can you tell
me about that experience?
From the time I was in college, I was fascinated by the question of
what human thought was—what made it different from a computer.
When I was a graduate student at Stanford, I started thinking about
whether you could design a machine that was more like the brain,
which has huge numbers of very slow processors—the neurons—
working in parallel instead of a single very fast processor.
Were there any other people working to develop parallel super-
computers at that time?
Although there were already a substantial number of outstanding
researchers working on parallel computation before I got started,
most of them were looking at ways to connect, say, eight or sixteen
processors. I was intrigued with the idea of how you could build a
parallel computer with millions of processors, each next to a small
chunk of memory. There was a trade-off, however. Although there
were a lot more processors, they had to be much smaller and cheaper.
Still, for certain types of problems, theoretically, you could get speeds
that were a thousand times faster than the fastest supercomputer. To
be fair, there were a few other researchers who were interested in
these sorts of "fine-grained" parallel machines at the time—for exam-
ple, certain scientists working in the field of computer vision—but it
was definitely not the dominant theme within the field.
You said that you were trying to design a computer that worked
more like the brain. Could you elaborate?
At the time, one of the main constraints on computer speed was a
limitation often referred to as the "von Neumann bottleneck." The
THE Q U A N T I T A T I V E EDGE
traditional von Neumann machine, named after John von Neumann,
has a single central processing unit (CPU) connected to a single
memory unit. Originally, the two were well matched in speed and
size. Over time, however, as processors became faster and memories
got larger, the connection between the two—the time it takes for the
CPU to get things out of memory, perform the computations, and
place the results back into memory—became more and more of a
bottleneck.
This type of bottleneck does not exist in the brain because mem-
ory storage goes on in millions of different units that are connected to
each other through an enormous number of synapses. Although we
understand it imperfectly, we do know that whatever computation is
going on occurs in close proximity to the memory. In essence, the
thinking and the remembering seem to be much more extensively
intermingled than is the case in a traditional von Neumann machine.
The basic idea that drove my research was that if you could build a
computer that had a separate processor for each tiny chunk of mem-
ory, you might be able to get around the von Neumann bottleneck.
I assume that the necessary technology did not yet exist at that
time.
It was just beginning to exist. I completed my Ph.D. in 1980. By the
time I joined the faculty at Columbia University, it was possible to
put multiple processors, but very small and simple ones, on a single
chip. Our research project was the first one to build a chip containing
a number of real, multibit computers. At the time, we were able to
place eight 8-bit processors on a single chip. Nowadays, you could
probably put 512 or 1,024 similar processors on a chip.
Cray was already building supercomputers at the time. How did
your work differ from his?
Seymour Cray was probably the greatest single-processor supercom-
puter designer who ever lived. He was famous for pushing the tech-
nological envelope. With each new machine he built, he would use
new types of semiconductors, cooling apparatus, and wiring schemes
that had never been used before in an actual computer. He was also a
first-rate computer architect, but a substantial part of his edge came
from a combination of extraordinary engineering skills and sheer


--- PAGE 139 ---
D A V I D SHAVi
technological audacity. He had a lot more expertise in high-speed
technology, whereas my own focus was more on the architecture—
designing a fundamentally different type of computer.
You mentioned earlier that your involvement in computer design
had its origins in your fascination with human thought. Do you
believe it's theoretically possible for computers to eventually
think?
From a theoretical perspective, I see no intrinsic reason why they
couldn't.
So Hal in 2001 is not pure science fiction.
It's hard to know for sure, but I personally see no compelling reason
to believe that this couldn't happen at some point. But even if it does
prove feasible to build truly intelligent machines, I strongly suspect
that this won't happen for a very long time.
But you believe it's theoretically possible in the sense that a
computer could have a sense of self?
It's not entirely clear to me what it would mean for a computer to
have a sense of self, or for that matter, exactly what we mean when
we say that about a human being. But I don't see any intrinsic reason
why cognition should be possible only in hydrocarbon-based systems
like ourselves. There's certainly a lot we don't understand about how
humans think, but at some level, we can be viewed as a very interest-
ing collection of highly organized, interacting molecules. I haven't yet
seen any compelling evidence to suggest that the product of human
evolution represents the only possible way these molecules can be
organized in order to produce a phenomenon like thought.
Did you ever get to the point of applying your theoretical con-
cepts to building an actual working model of a supercomputer?
Yes, at least on a small scale. After I finished my Ph.D., I was
appointed to the faculty of the department of computer science at
Columbia University. I was fortunate enough to receive a multi-
million-dollar research contract from ARPA [the Advanced Research
Projects Agency of the U.S. Department of Defense, which is best
known for building the ARPAnet, the precursor of the Internet]. This
funding allowed me to organize a team of thirty-five people to design
T H E Q U A N T I T A T I V E
customized integrated circuits and build a working prototype of this
sort of massively parallel machine. It was a fairly small version, but it
did allow us to test out our ideas and collect the data we needed to
calculate the theoretically achievable speed of a full-scale supercom-
puter based on the same architectural principles.
Was any thought given to who would have ownership rights if
your efforts to build a supercomputer were successful?
Not initially. Once we built a successful prototype, though, it became
clear that it would take another $10 to $20 million to build a full-
scale supercomputer, which was more than the government was real-
istically likely to provide in the form of basic research funding. At that
point, we did start looking around for venture capital to form a com-
pany. Our motivation was not just to make money, but also to take our
project to the next step from a scientific viewpoint.
At the time, had anyone else manufactured a supercomputer
using parallel processor architecture?
A number of people had built multiprocessor machines incorporating
a relatively small number of processors, but at the time we launched
our research project, nobody had yet built a massively parallel super-
computer of the type we were proposing.
Were you able to raise any funding?
No, at least not after a couple months of trying, after which point my
career took an unexpected turn. If it hadn't, I don't know for sure
whether we would have ultimately found someone willing to risk a
few tens of millions of dollars on what was admittedly a fairly risky
business plan. But based on the early reactions we got from the ven-
ture capital community, I suspect we probably wouldn't have. What
happened, though, was that after word got out that I was exploring
options in the private sector, I received a call from an executive
search firm about the possibility of heading up a really interesting
group at Morgan Stanley. At that point, I'd become fairly pessimistic
about our prospects for raising all the money we'd need to start a seri-
ous supercomputer company. So when Morgan Stanley made what
seemed to me to be a truly extraordinary offer, I made the leap to Wall
Street.


--- PAGE 140 ---
D A V I D S H A W
T H E QUANTITAT1I
Up to that point, had you given any thought to a career in the
financial markets?
None whatsoever.
I had read that your stepfather was a financial economist who
first introduced you to the efficient market hypothesis.* Did that
bias you as to the feasibility of developing strategies that could
beat the market? Also, given your own lengthy track record, does
your stepfather still believe in the efficient market hypothesis?
Although it's true that my stepfather was the first one to expose me to
the idea that most, if not all, publicly available information about a
given company is already reflected in its current market price, I'm
not sure that he ever believed it was impossible to beat the market.
The things I learned from him probably led me to be more skeptical
than most people about the existence of a "free lunch" in the stock
market, but he never claimed that the absence of evidence refuting
the efficient market hypothesis proved that the markets are, in fact,
efficient.
Actually, there is really no way to prove that is the case. All you
can ever demonstrate is that the specific patterns being tested do
not exist. You can never prove that there aren't any patterns that
could beat the market.
That's exactly right. All that being said, I grew up with the idea that, if
not impossible, it was certainly extremely difficult to beat the market.
And even now, I find it remarkable how efficient the markets actually
are. It would be nice if all you had to do in order to earn abnormally
large returns was to identify some sort of standard pattern in the his-
torical prices of a given stock. But most of the claims that are made by
so-called technical analysts, involving constructs like support and
resistance levels and head-and-shoulders patterns, have absolutely no
grounding in methodologically sound empirical research.
But isn't it possible that many of these patterns can't be rigor-
There are three variations of this theory: (1) weak form—past prices cannot be used lo
predict future prices; (2) semistrong form—the current price reflects all publicly
known information; (3) strong form—the current price reflects all information,
whether publicly known or not.
ously tested because they can't be defined objectively? For exam-
ple, you might define a head-and-shoulders pattern one way
while I might define it quite differently. In fact, for many pat-
terns, theoretically, there could be an infinite number of possible
definitions.
Yes, that's an excellent point. But the inability to precisely explicate
the hypothesis being tested is one of the signposts of a pseudo-
science. Even for those patterns where it's been possible to come up
with a reasonable consensus definition for the sorts of patterns tradi-
tionally described by people who refer to themselves as technical ana-
lysts, researchers have generally not found these patterns to have any
predictive value. The interesting thing is that even some of the most
highly respected Wall Street firms employ at least a few of these "pre-
scientific" technical analysts, despite the fact that there's little evi-
dence they're doing anything more useful than astrology.
But wait a minute. I've interviewed quite a number of traders
who are purely technically oriented and have achieved return-to-
risk results that were well beyond the realm of chance.
I think it depends on your definition of technical analysis. Histori-
cally, most of the people who have used that term have been members
of the largely unscientific head-and-shoulders-support-and-resistance
camp. These days, the people who do serious, scholarly work in the
field generally refer to themselves as quantitative analysts, and some
of them have indeed discovered real anomalies in the marketplace.
The problem, of course, is that as soon as these anomalies are pub-
lished, they tend to disappear because people exploit them. Andrew
Lo at MIT is one of the foremost academic experts in the field. He is
responsible for identifying some of these historical inefficiencies and
publishing the results. If you talk to him about it, he will probably tell
you two things: first, that they tend to go away over time; second, that
he suspects that the elimination of these market anomalies can be
attributed at least in part to firms like ours.
What is an example of a market anomaly that existed but now no
longer works because it was publicized?
We don't like to divulge that type of information. In our business, it's


--- PAGE 141 ---
D A V I D S H A W
as important to know what doesn't work as what does. For that reason,
once we've gone to the considerable expense that's often involved in
determining that an anomaly described in the open literature no
longer exists, the last thing we want to do is to enable one of our com-
petitors to take advantage of this information for free by drawing
attention to the fact that the published results no longer hold and the
approach in question thus represents a dead end.
Are the people who publish studies of market inefficiencies in
the financial and economic journals strictly academics or are
some of them involved in trading the markets?
Some of the researchers who actually trade the markets publish cer-
tain aspects of their work, especially in periodicals like the Journal of
Portfolio Management, but overall, there's a tendency for academics to
be more open about their results than practitioners.
Why would anyone who trades the markets publish something
that works?
That's a very good question. For various reasons, the vast majority of the
high-quality work that appears in the open literature can't be used in
practice to actually beat the market. Conversely, the vast majority of the
research that really does work will probably never be published. But
there are a few successful quantitative traders who from time to time
publish useful information, even when it may not be in their own self-
interest to do so. My favorite example is Ed Thorpe, who was a real pio-
neer in the field. He was doing this stuff well before almost anyone else.
Ed has been remarkably open about some of the money-making strate-
gies he's discovered over the years, both within and outside of the field
of finance. After he figured out how to beat the casinos at blackjack, he
published Beat the Dealer. Then when he figured out how to beat the
market, he published Beat the Market, which explained with his usual
professorial clarity exactly how to take advantage of certain demonstra-
ble market inefficiencies that existed at the time. Of course, the publi-
cation of his book helped to eliminate those very inefficiencies.
In the case of blackjack, does eliminating the inefficiencies
mean that the casinos went to the use of multiple decks?
I'm not an expert on blackjack, but it's my understanding that the
casinos not only adopted specific game-related countermeasures of
SHE Q U A N T I T A T I V E ED6E
this sort, but they also became more aware of "card counters" and
became more effective at expelling them from the casinos.
I know that classic arbitrage opportunities are long gone. Did
such sitting-duck trades, however, exist when you first started?
Even then, those sorts of true arbitrage opportunities were few and
far between. Every once in a while, we were able to engage in a
small set of transactions in closely related instruments that, taken
together, locked in a risk-free or nearly risk-free profit. Occasionally,
we'd even find it possible to execute each component of a given arbi-
trage trade with a different department of the same major financial
institution—something that would have been impossible if the insti-
tution had been using technology to effectively manage all of its
positions on an integrated firm wide basis. But those sorts of opportu-
nities were very rare even in those days, and now you basically don't
see them at all.
Have the tremendous advances in computer technology, which
greatly facilitate searching for market inefficiencies that provide
a probabilistic edge, caused some previous inefficiencies to dis-
appear and made new ones harder to find?
The game is largely over for most of the "easy" effects. Maybe some-
day, someone will discover a simple effect that has eluded all of us,
but it's been our experience that the most obvious and mathemati-
cally straightforward ideas you might think of have largely disap-
peared as potential trading opportunities. What you are left with is a
number of relatively small inefficiencies that are often fairly complex
and which you're not likely to find by using a standard mathematical
software package or the conventional analytical techniques you might
learn in graduate school. Even if you were somehow able to find one
of the remaining inefficiencies without going through an extremely
expensive, long-term research effort of the sort we've conducted over
the past eleven years, you'd probably find that one such inefficiency
wouldn't be enough to cover your transaction costs.
As a result, the current barriers to entry in this field are very high.
A firm like ours that has identified a couple dozen market inefficien-
cies in a given set of financial instruments may be able to make
money even in the presence of transaction costs. In contrast, a new


--- PAGE 142 ---
D A V I D S H A W
entrant into the field who has identified only one or two market inef-
ficiencies would typically have a much harder time doing so.
What gives you that edge?
It's a subtle effect. A single inefficiency may not be sufficient to over-
come transaction costs. When multiple inefficiencies happen to coin-
cide, however, they may provide an opportunity to trade with a
statistically expected profit that exceeds the associated transaction
costs. Other things being equal, the more inefficiencies you can iden-
tify, the more trading opportunities you're likely to have.
How could the use of multiple strategies, none of which independently
yields a profit, be profitable? As a simple illustration, imagine that there
are two strategies, each of which has an expected gain of $100 and a
transaction cost of $110. Neither of these strategies could be applied
profitably on its own. Further assume that the subset of trades in which
both strategies provide signals in the same direction has an average profit
of $180 and the same $110 transaction cost. Trading the subset could be
highly profitable, even though each individual strategy is ineffective by
itself. Of course, for Shaw's company, which trades scores of strategies in
many related markets, the effect of strategy interdependencies is tremen-
dously more complex.
As the field matures, you need to be aware of more and more inef-
ficiencies to identify trades, and it becomes increasingly harder for
new entrants. When we started trading eleven years ago, you could
have identified one or two inefficiencies and still beat transaction
costs. That meant you could do a limited amount of research and
begin trading profitably, which gave you a way to fund future
research. Nowadays, things are a lot tougher. If we hadn't gotten
started when we did, I think it would have been prohibitively expen-
sive for us to get where we are today.
Do you use only price data in your model, or do you also employ
fundamental data?
It's definitely not just price data. We look at balance sheets, income
statements, volume information, and almost any other sort of data
T H E Q U A N T I T A T I V E
we can get our hands on in digital form. I can't say much about the
sorts of variables we find most useful in practice, but I can say that
we use an extraordinary amount of, data, and spend a lot of money
not just acquiring it but also putting it into a form in which it's useful
to us.
Would it be fair to summarize the philosophy of your firm as fol-
lows? Markets can be predicted only to a very limited extent, and
any single strategy cannot provide an attractive return-to-risk
ratio. If you combine enough strategies, however, you can create
a trading model that has a meaningful edge.
That's a really good description. The one thing that I would add is that
we try to hedge as many systematic risk factors as possible.
I assume you mean that you balance all long positions with cor-
related short positions, thereby removing directional moves in
the market as a risk factor.
Hedging against overall market moves within the various markets
we trade is one important element of our approach to risk manage-
ment, but there are also a number of other risk factors with respect
to which we try to control our exposure whenever we're not specifi-
cally betting on them. For example, if you invest in IBM, you're
placing an implicit bet not only on the direction of the stock market
as a whole and on the performance of the computer industry rela-
tive to the overall stock market, but also on a number of other risk
factors.
Such as?
Examples would include the overall level of activity within the econ-
omy, any unhedged exchange rate exposure attributable to IBM's
export activities, the net effective interest rate exposure associated
with the firm's assets, liabilities, and commercial activities, and a
number of other mathematically derived risk factors that would be
more difficult to describe in intuitively meaningful terms. Although
it's neither possible nor cost-effective to hedge all forms of risk, we try
to minimize our net exposure to those sources of risk that we aren't
able to predict while maintaining our exposure to those variables for
which we do have some predictive ability, at least on a statistical basis.


--- PAGE 143 ---
S H A W
Some of the strategies you were using in your early years are now
completely obsolete. Could you talk about one of these just to
provide an illustration of the type of market inefficiency that at
least at one time offered a trading opportunity.
In general, I try not to say much about historical inefficiencies that
have disappeared from the markets, since even that type of informa-
tion could help competitors decide how to more effectively allocate
scarce research resources, allowing them a "free ride" on our own neg-
ative findings, which would give them an unfair competitive advan-
tage. One example I can give you, though, is undervalued options
[options trading at prices below the levels implied by theoretical mod-
els]. Nowadays, if you find an option that appears to be mispriced,
there is usually a reason. Years ago, that wasn't necessarily the case.
When you find an apparent anomaly or pattern in the historical
data, how do you know it represents something real as opposed
to a chance occurrence?
The more variables you have, the greater the number of statistical
artifacts that you're likely to find, and the more difficult it will gener-
ally be to tell whether a pattern you uncover actually has any predic-
tive value. We take great care to avoid the methodological pitfalls
associated with "overfitting the data."
Although we use a number of different mathematical techniques
to establish the robustness and predictive value of our strategies, one
of our most powerful tools is the straightforward application of the
scientific method. Rather than blindly searching through the data for
patterns—an approach whose methodological dangers are widely
appreciated within, for example, the natural science and medical
research communities—we typically start by formulating a hypothesis
based on some sort of structural theory or qualitative understanding
of the market, and then test that hypothesis to see whether it is sup-
ported by the data.
Unfortunately, the most common outcome is that the actual data
fail to provide evidence that would allow us to reject the "null hypoth-
esis" of market efficiency. Every once in a while, though, we do find a
new market anomaly that passes all our tests, and which we wind up
incorporating in an actual trading strategy.
f«E QUANTITATIVElliE
I heard that your firm ran into major problems last year [1998],
but when I look at your performance numbers, I see that your
worst equity decline ever was only 11 percent—and even that
loss was recovered in only a few months. I don't understand how
there could have been much of a problem. What happened?
The performance results you're referring to are for our equity and
equity-linked trading strategies, which have formed the core of our
proprietary trading activities since our start over eleven years ago. For
a few years, though, we also traded a fixed income strategy. That
strategy was qualitatively different from the equity-related strategies
we'd historically employed and exposed us to fundamentally different
sorts of risks. Although we initially made a lot of money on our fixed
income trading, we experienced significant losses during the global
liquidity crisis in late 1998, as was the case for most fixed income
arbitrage traders during that period. While our losses were much
smaller, in both percentage and absolute dollar terms, than those suf-
fered by, for example, Long Term Capital Management, they were
significant enough that we're no longer engaged in this sort of trading
at all.
LTCM—a hedge fund headed by renowned former-Salomon bond
trader John Meriwether and whose principals included economics
Nobel laureates Robert Merton and Myron Scholes—was on the
brink of extinction during the second half of 1998. After registering
an average annual gain of 34 percent in its first three years and
expanding its assets under management to near $5 billion, LTCM
lost a staggering 44 percent (roughly $2 billion) in August 1998 alone.
These losses were due to a variety of factors, but their magnitude was
primarily attributable to excessive leverage: the firm used borrowing
to leverage its holdings by an estimated factor of over 40 to 1. The
combination of large losses and large debt would have resulted in
LTCM's collapse. The firm, however, was saved by a Federal Reserve
coordinated $3.5 billion bailout (financed by private financial institu-
tions, not government money).


--- PAGE 144 ---
With all the ventures you have going, do you manage to take any
time off?
I just took a week off—the first one in a long time.
So you don't take much vacation?
Not much. When I take a vacation, I find I need a few hours of work
each day just to keep myself sane.
You have a reputation for recruiting brilliant Ph.D.'s in math and
sciences. Do you hire people just for their raw intellectual capa-
bility, even if there is no specific job slot to fill?
Compared with most organizations, we tend to hire more on the
basis of raw ability and less on the basis of experience. If we run
across someone truly gifted, we try to make them an offer, even if we
don't have an immediate position in mind for that person. The most
famous example is probably Jeff Bezos. One of my partners
approached me and said, "I've just interviewed this terrific candidate
named Jeff Bezos. We don't really have a slot for him, but I think he's
going to make someone a lot of money someday, and I think you
should at least spend some time with him." I met with Jeff and was
really impressed by his intellect, creativity, and entrepreneurial
instincts. I told my partner that he was right and that even though we
didn't have a position for him, we should hire him anyway and figure
something out.
Did Bezos leave your firm to start Amazon?
Yes. Jeff did a number of things during the course of his tenure at D. E.
Shaw, but his last assignment was to work with me on the formulation
of ideas for various technology-related new ventures. One of those
ideas was to create what amounted to a universal electronic book-
store. When we discovered that there was an electronic catalog with
millions of titles that could be ordered through Ingram's [a major
book distributor], Jeff and I did a few back-of-the-envelope calcula-
tions and realized that it ought to be possible to start such a venture
without a prohibitively large initial investment. Although I don't think
either of us had any idea at the time how successful such a business
could be, we both thought it had possibilities. One day, before things
had progressed much further, Jeff asked to speak with me. We took a
I H E Q:UANTITATIV£;I1BI
walk through Central Park, during which he tolcl me that he'd "gotten
the entrepreneurial bug" and asked how I'd feel about it if he decided
he wanted to pursue this idea on his own.
What was your reaction?
I told him I'd be genuinely sorry to lose him, and made sure he knew
how highly I thought of his work at D. E. Shaw, and how promising I
thought his prospects were within the firm. But I also told him that,
having made a similar decision myself at one point, I'd understand
completely if he decided the time had come to strike out on his own
and would not try to talk him out of it. I assured him that given the
relatively short period of time we'd been talking about the electronic
bookstore concept, I'd have no objections whatsoever if he decided
that he wanted to pursue this idea on his own. I told him that we
might or might not decide to compete with him at some point, and he
said that seemed perfectly fair to him.
Jeff's departure was completely amicable, and when he finished
the alpha version of the first Amazon system, he invited me and oth-
ers at D. E. Shaw to test it. It wasn't until I used this alpha version to
order my first book that I realized how powerful this concept could
really be. Although we'd talked about the idea of an electronic book-
store while Jeff was still at D. E. Shaw, it's the things Jeff did since
leaving that made Amazon what it is today.
Shaw's trading approach, which requires highly complex mathe-
matical models, vast computer power, constant monitoring of world-
wide markets by a staff of traders, and near instantaneous, extreme
low-cost trade executions, is clearly out of the reach of the ordinary
investor. One concept that came up in this interview, however, that
could have applicability to the individual investor is the idea that
market patterns ("inefficiencies" in Shaw's terminology) that are not
profitable on their own might still provide the basis for a profitable
strategy when combined with other patterns. Although Shaw dis-
dains chart patterns and traditional technical indicators, an analo-
gous idea would apply: It is theoretically possible that a combination


--- PAGE 145 ---
of patterns (or indicators) could yield a useful trading model, even if
the individual elements are worthless when used alone.
This synergistic effect would apply to fundamental inputs as well.
For example, a researcher might test ten different fundamental fac-
tors and find that none are worthwhile as price indicators. Does this
imply that these fundamental inputs should be dismissed as useless?
Absolutely not. Even though no single factor provides a meaningful
predictor, it is entirely possible that some combination of these
inputs could yield a useful price indicator.
Another important principle that came up in this interview con-
cerns the appropriate methodology in testing trading ideas. A trader
trying to develop a systematic approach, or any approach that incorpo-
rates computer patterns as signals, should caution against data min-
ing—letting the computer cycle through the data, testing thousands
or millions of input combinations in search of profitable patterns.
Although the expense of computer time is usually no longer an issue,
such computational profligacy has a more critical cost: it will tend to
generate trading models (systems) that look great, but have no predic-
tive power—a combination that could lead to large trading losses.
Why? Because patterns can be found even in random data. For
example, if you flipped one million coins ten times apiece, on aver-
age, about 977 of those coins would land on heads all ten times.
Obviously, it would be foolish to assume that these coins are more
likely to land on heads in the future. But this type of naive reasoning
is precisely what some system developers do when they test huge
numbers of input combinations on price data and then trade the
combination that is most profitable. If you test enough variations of
any trading system, some of them will be profitable by chance—just
as some coins will land on heads on every toss if you flip enough
coins. Shaw avoids this problem of data mining by requiring that a
theoretical hypothesis precede each computer test and by using rig-
orous statistical measures to evaluate the significance of the results.
STEVE COHEN
The Trading Room
"He's the best," said an industry contact, referring to Steve Cohen, when I
asked him to recommend possible interview candidates. I would hear vir-
tually the same assessment repeated several more times whenever
Cohen's name was mentioned by industry acquaintances. When I looked
at Cohen's numbers, I understood the reason for their ebullient praise. In
the seven years he has managed money, Cohen has averaged a com-
pounded annual return of 45 percent, with only three losing months in
the entire period—the worst a tiny 2 percent decline.
These numbers, however, dramatically understate Cohen's trading
talent. Cohen is so good that he is able to charge a 50 percent profit
incentive fee, which means that his actual trading profits have averaged
approximately 90 percent per year. Despite stratospheric fees—approxi-
mately two and a half times the hedge fund industry average—Cohen
has not had a problem attracting investors. In fact, his flagship fund is
closed to new investment.
Cohen's firm, S.A.C., which derives its name from his initials, is
located in an office building whose architectural style can best be
described as "Connecticut Corporate"—a low-rise, rectangular facade of
glass squares. I expected to find Cohen sitting in a window-encased
office with a glass and steel desk. Instead, the receptionist led me into a
huge, windowless room with six long rows of desks, seating approxi-
mately sixty traders, each trader with an array of six to twelve computer
screens. Despite its size, the room was so filled with people and equip-
ment that it felt more cavelike than cavernous. The absence of windows
created a bunkerlike atmosphere.
275


--- PAGE 146 ---
S T E V E C O H E N
The traders were all dressed casually, with attire ranging from T-shirts
and shorts, which was appropriate for the weather, to jeans or slacks and
polar fleeces for those who found the air conditioning too cold. Cohen
was seated near the middle of one row of desks, totally indistinguishable
from any of the other traders in the room. (He was one of the polar fleece
contingent.) Cohen has used his trading success to lure traders specializ-
ing in a whole range of market sectors. He has chosen to surround him-
self with traders, figuratively and literally.
When I arrived, Cohen was in the midst of a lengthy phone conver-
sation—ironically, he was being interviewed by The Wall Street Journal.
("This is media day down here!" Cohen would later exclaim to a caller,
referring to the dual interviews.) I squeezed a chair in alongside Cohen's
slot within the room-length desk while I waited for him to get off the
phone. Throughout his phone conversation, Cohen kept his eyes glued
on the quote screens in front of him. At one point, he interrupted his
conversation to call out an order. "Sell 20 [20,000] Pokemon." As an
aside to the rest of the room, he said, "My kids love it, but what the
hell." He reminded me of Jason Alexander from Seinfeld—a combina-
tion of a slight physical resemblance, speech patterns, and sense of
humor.
The room was surprisingly quiet, considering the number of traders. I
realized what was missing—ringing phones; the order clerks had open
lines to the exchange floors. Every now and then there would be a flurry
of activity and an accompanying wave of increased noise. Traders contin-
ually shouted out buy and sell orders, news items, and queries to others
in the room. Sample: "Anyone know—Is Martha Stewart going to be a
hot offering?" Every couple of minutes, Cohen called out a buy or sell
order to be executed, in a tone so casual that you might have thought he
was placing an order for a tuna fish on rye, instead of buying or selling
25,000 to 100,000 shares at a clip.
What is the stock you shorted that has a product that your kids
love?
Nintendo. They do Pokemon. Do you know Pokemon?
T H E T R A D I N G R O O M
Afraid not. [This interview preceded the media crescendo that
led to a Pokemon Time magazine cover.]
It's a Japanese cartoon character that is very popular right now.
Why are you shorting it, if your kids like it?
Because I think it's a fad. It's a one-product company.
[Looking at the screen, Cohen comments] I think the market may go a
little higher, but I'm actually turning very negative.
Why is that?
The big caps are moving higher, but the rally has no breadth. The
market is moving up on light volume. Also, people will start to get
more concerned about Y2K as we get closer to the end of the year.
A Fed announcement concerning interest rates is scheduled for the day I
am visiting. As we approach within fifteen minutes of the announce-
ment, Cohen begins entering a slew of buy and sell orders well removed
from the prevailing market prices. "In case the market does something
stupid," he explains. In other words, he is positioning himself to take the
opposite side of any extreme reaction—price run-up or sell-off—in
response to the Fed report.
Just before the announcement, the TV is turned on, just like in the
movie Trading Places. (Although, for the record, the Trading Places
sequence, which takes place on the commodity trading floor, is divorced
from reality because the release of agricultural reports is deliberately
delayed until after the close of the futures markets—but then again it's
only a comedy.) As the clock ticks down to 2 P.M., the tension and antici-
pation build. Cohen claps his hands and laughs, shouting in eagerness,
"Here we go!" A minute before the announcement, a spontaneous rhyth-
mic clapping—the let's go [team name] beat one hears at sports events—
ripples through the room.
The Fed announcement of a ]A percent hike in interest rates is exactly
in line with expectations, and the market response is muted. There is a
small flurry of trading activity in the room, which quickly peters out.
"Okay, that was exciting, let's go home," Cohen jokingly announces.
Cohen methodically types quote symbols into his keyboard at the rate
of approximately one per second, bringing up companies that are not on


--- PAGE 147 ---
one of his numerous quote screens. The market begins to rally, and
Cohen considers buying but then decides to hold off. Ten minutes later
the market reverses direction, more than erasing its prior gains.
How much of what you do is gut feel?
A lot, probably at least 50 percent.
I attempt to continue the interview, but it is virtually impossible with all
the distractions and interruptions. Cohen is intently focused on his com-
puter screens, frequently calling out trades, and also taking phone calls.
The few questions and answers that I manage to record contain nothing
that I wish to retain. The remainder of the interview, with the exception
of the final section, is conducted in the more sedate environs of Cohen's
office.
When did you first become aware that there was a stock market?
When I was about thirteen years old. My father used to bring home
the New York Post every evening. I always checked the sports pages. I
noticed that there were all these other pages filled with numbers. I
was fascinated when I found out that these numbers were prices,
which were changing every day.
I started hanging out at the local brokerage office, watching the
stock quotes. When I was in high school, I took a summer job at a
clothing store, located just down the block from a brokerage office, so
that I could run in and watch the tape during my lunch hour. In those
days, the tape was so slow that you could follow it. You could see vol-
ume coming into a stock and get the sense that it was going higher.
You can't do that nowadays; the tape is far too fast. But everything I
do today has its roots in those early tape-reading experiences.
Did your economics education at Wharton help at all in your
career as a stock trader?
Not much. A few things they taught you were helpful.
Like what?
They taught you that 40 percent of a stock's price movement was due
to the market, 30 percent to the sector, and only 30 percent to the
stock itself, which is something that i believe is true. 1 don't know if the
percentages arc exactly correct, but conceptually the idea makes sense.
When you put on a trade arid it goes against you, how do you
decide when you're wrong?
11 I am in I he track' because of a catalyst, the first thing I check is
whether I he catalyst s t i l l applies. I'or example, about a month ago, 1
expected that IBM would report disappointing earnings, and I went
short ahead of (he report. I was bearish because a lot of computer and
software companies were missing their numbers [reporting lower-
than-expecled earnings] due to Y2K issues. Customers were delaying
the installation of new systems because with the year 2000 just
around the corner, they figured that they might as well stick with their
existing systems.
1 went short the slock at $169. The earnings came out. and they
were just: phenomenal—-a complete blowout! I got out sharply higher
in alter-the close trading, buying back my position at $187. The trade
just didn't work. The nexi day the stock opened at $197. So thank
Cod I covered thai night in alter-hours trading.
Has that been something you were always able to do—that is,
turn on a dime when you think you're wrong?
You better be able to do that. This is not a perfect game. 1 compile
statistics on my traders. My best trader makes money only 63 percent
or the time. Most traders make money only in the 50 to 55 percent
range. That means you're going to he wrong a lot. If that's the case,
you better make sure your losses are as small as they can be, and that
your winners are bigger.
Any trade stand out as being particularly emotional?
1 held a 23 percent position in a private company that was bought by
XYZ. | Cohen asked me not to use the actual name because of his con-
tacts with the company. As a result, I ended up with a stock position
in XYZ, which i held for lour or live years in my personal account
without the stock doing much ol anything.
XVZ had a subsidiary, which had an Internet Web site for financial
commentary. They decided lo take this subsidiary public. XYZ stock
started to run up in front of the scheduled offering, rallying to $13,


--- PAGE 148 ---
which was higher than it had been at any lime 1 held it. 1 got out, and
was happy to do so.
The public offering, which was originally scheduled lor Decem-
ber, was delayed and the stock drifted down. A tew weeks later, they
announced a new offering date in January, and the stock skyrocketed
as part of the Internet mania. In two weeks, XYZ went up from $ 10 to
over $30.
I couldn't stand the idea that after holding the stock for all those
years, J got out just before it exploded on the upside. But I was really
pissed off because I knew the company, and there was no way the
stock was remotely worth more than $30. The subsidiary was going
public at $15. If it traded at $100, it would be worth only about $10
to the company. If it traded at $200, it would add only about $20 to
the company's value. The rest of the company was worth maybe $5.
So you had a stock, which under the most optimistic circumstances
was worth only $15 to $25, trading at over $30.
1 started shorting the hell out of the stock. I ended up selling
900,000 shares of stock and a couple of thousand calls. My average
sales price was around $35, and the stock went as high as $45. On
Friday, the day of the offering, XYZ plummeted. On Friday afternoon
I covered the stock at $22, $21, and $20. 1 bought back the calls,
which I had sold at $ I 0 to $15, for $ 1.
This trade worked out phenomenally well. But when you go
short, the risk is open-ended. Even here, you said your average
price was around $35 and the stock did go as high as $45. What
if it kept going higher? At what point would you throw in the
towel? Or, if your assessment that the stock was tremendously
overvalued remained unchanged, would you just hold it?
A basic principle in going short is that there has to be a catalyst. Flere,
the catalyst was the offering. The offering was on Friday, and I started
going short on Tuesday, so that I would be fully positioned by that
time. If the offering took place, and the stock didn't go down, then I
probably would have covered. What had made me so angry was that I
had sold out my original position.
So you got redemption.
I got redemption. That was coo!.
THE T R A D I N G ROOM
What happens when you are short a stock that is moving against
you, and there is no imminent catalyst? You sold it at $40, and it
goes to $45, $50. When do you get out?
It a stock is moving against me, I'm probably buying in some every day.
Even if there's no change in the fundamentals?
Oh sure. I always tell my traders, "If you think you're wrong, or if the
market is moving against you and you don't know why, take in half. You
can always put it on again." If you do that twice, you've taken in three-
quarters of your position. Then what's left is no longer a big deal. The
thing is to start moving your feet. I find that too many traders just stand
there and let the truck roll over them. A common mistake traders make
in shorting is that they take on too big of a position relative to their
portfolio. Then when the stock moves against them, the pain becomes
too great to handle, and they end up panicking or freezing.
What other mistakes do people make?
They make trades without a good reason. They step in front of freight
trains. They short stocks because they are up, as if that were a reason.
They'll say, "1 can't believe the stock is so high," and that's their total
research. That makes no sense to me. My response is: "You have to do
better than that." I have friends who get emotional about the market.
They fight it. Why put yourself in that position?
But the XYZ trade that you told me about, wasn't that fighting the
market?
The difference is that there was a catalyst. I knew the offering was
scheduled for Friday. I knew what was going on. I also knew what I
expected to happen. It was actually a well-planned trade, even
though I was pissed off at having liquidated my stock position so
much lower.
What else do people do wrong?
You have to know what you are, ancl not try to be what you're not. If
you are a day trader, day trade. If you are an investor, then be an
investor. It's like a comedian who gets up onstage ancl starts singing.
What's he singing for? He's a comedian. Here's one I really don't
understand: I know these guys who set up a hedge fund that was part
trading and part small cap. Small caps are incredibly illiquid, and you
have to hold them forever—it's the exact opposite of trading!


--- PAGE 149 ---
S T E V E COHEfl
How do you interact with the traders who work for you?
I have different traders covering different sectors for a number of rea-
sons. There are a lot of people in the room, and it would be cumber-
some to have different traders trading the same names. Also, since
we're trading over one billion dollars now, we want to cover as many
situations as we can. This firm is very horizontal in nature, and I'm
sort of orchestrating the whole thing. You could say I'm the hub and
the traders are the spokes.
How do you handle a situation when a trader wants to put on a
trade that you disagree with?
I don't want to tell my traders what to do. I don't have a corner on
what's right. All I want to do is make sure they have the same facts
that I do, and if they still want to do the trade, then they can. I
encourage my guys to play. I have to. I'm running over one billion dol-
lars. I can't do it all myself.
How do you pick your traders?
A lot of the traders who work here were referred to me. I have also
trained people who have grown up within the system. I've had people
who began as clerks and are now trading tens of millions or dollars,
and doing it very well.
One thing I like to do is pair up traders. You need a sounding
board. You need someone who will say, "Why are we in this position?"
There is a check and balance, as opposed to being in your own world.
We also have teams where the trader is teamed up with an analyst
of the same industry. I like that idea because it helps the trader learn
the subtleties of the industry and understand what factors really move
the stocks in that sector.
Are these trading teams informal or are they literally pooling
their trading capital?
No, they're working together. Their livelihood depends on each other.
Have you seen improvements in the trading performance by
using this team approach?
The results speak for themselves.
Was the team approach your idea?
It was an evolutionary process. Most traders want to trade everything.
One minute they are trading Yahoo, the next Exxon. They're traders!
THE T R A D I N G R O O M
My place operates very differently. I want my traders to be highly
focused. I want them to know a lot about something, instead of a lit-
tle about everything.
That means they can't diversify.
They can't, but the firm is diversified. As long as they can trade the
short side as well as the long side, I don't think anyone in this room
thinks being focused on a single sector is a negative.
Are you looking for any special skills when you hire potential
traders?
I'm looking for people who are not afraid to take risks. One of the
questions I ask is: "Tell me some of the riskiest things you've ever
done in your life." I want guys who have the confidence to be out
there; to be risk takers.
What would make you wary about a trader?
I'm concerned about traders who wait for someone else to tell them
what to do. I know someone who could be a great trader. He has only
one problem: He refuses to make his own decisions. He wants every-
one else to tell him what to buy and sell. And then when he's wrong,
he doesn't know when to get out. I've known him for a long time, and
he's done this all along.
Do you give him advice?
Yeah! It doesn't matter. He still does it. He finds a new way to make it
look like he's making his own decisions, but he really isn't. Ironically,
if he just made his own decisions, he would do great. Obviously, on
some level he's afraid. Maybe he is afraid of looking stupid.
You have had quite a run—years of mammoth returns and a size-
able amount of capital under management. Are you ever tempted
to just cash in the chips and retire?
A lot of people get scared and think that since they made a lot of
money they'd better protect it. That's a very limiting philosophy. I am
just the opposite. I want to keep the firm growing. I have no interest
in retiring. First, I have nothing else to do. I don't want to go play
golf. You know the old saying: "Golf is great until you can play three
times a week, and then it's no fun anymore." Second, I enjoy what
I'm doing.
I've grown the company in a way that has kept my interest.


--- PAGE 150 ---
STilt C O H E H J
We've expanded from just traditional trading to a whole range of
new strategies: market neutral, risk arbitrage, event driven, and so
on. Also, my traders teach me about their sectors. I'm always learn-
ing, which keeps it exciting and new. I'm not doing the same thing
that I was doing ten years ago. I have evolved and will continue to
evolve.
Do you have a scenario about how the current long-running bull
market will end ?
It's going to end badly; it always ends badly. Everybody in the world
is talking stocks now. Everybody wants to be a trader. To me that is
the sign of something ending, not something beginning. You can't
have everybody on one side of the fence. The world doesn't work
that way.
Any final words?
You can't control what the market does, but you can control your reac-
tion to the market. I examine what I do all the time. That's what trad-
ing is all about.
These turn out not to be his final words for the interview. After my visit, I
called Cohen with some follow-up questions. This phone portion of the
interview follows.
How would you describe your methodology?
I combine lots of information coming at me from all directions with a
good feel for how the markets are moving to make market bets.
What differentiates you from other traders?
I'm not a lone wolf. Many traders like to fight their own battles. I pre-
fer to get a lot of support. The main reason I am as successful as I am
is that I've built an incredible team.
Hypothetically, what would happen if you were trading in a room
on your own?
I would still be very profitable, but I wouldn't do as well. There is no
way I could cover the same breadth of the market.
What about the timing of your trades. Why do you put on a trade
today versus yesterday or tomorrow, or for that matter, at a given
moment, as opposed to an hour earlier or later?
T H E T R A D I N G R O O M
It depends on the trade. I put on trades for lots of different reasons.
Sometimes I trade off the tape—the individual stock price action;
sometimes I trade off the sector; and sometimes I trade based on a
catalyst.
When I was there last week, you were bullish on bonds. Since
then, prices initially went a little higher but then sold off. Did
you stay long?
No, I got out of the position. The basic idea is that you trade your
theory and then let the market tell you whether you are right.
I have heard that you have a psychiatrist on staff to work with
your traders.
Ari Kiev. He works here three days a week. [Kiev is interviewed in this
book.]
How did this come about?
Ari's experience includes working with Olympic athletes. I saw some
similarities: Traders also work in a highly competitive environment
and are performance driven. I felt that the inability of some traders to
achieve success was usually due to personal flaws rather than a con-
sequence of bad ideas versus good ideas. All traders have something
holding them back.
Has the counseling arrangement with Ari been helpful?
I've seen results. If you look around, baseball players have coaches,
tennis players have coaches, and so on. Why shouldn't traders have
coaches?
Of the tens of thousands of trades that you have done, do any
stand out?
One time, I shorted a million shares of a stock and it dropped $ 10 the
next day. That was pretty good.
What was the story there?
Without naming any names—or else the company will never speak to
me again—there were a number of other stocks in the sector that
were under pressure, but this stock was going up because it was being
added to the S&P index. I figured that once the index fund buying
was completed, the stock would sell off. The day after I went short,
the company reported disappointing earnings, and the trade turned
into a home run.


--- PAGE 151 ---
S T E V E C O H E N
Any positions you ever lost sleep over?
Nah, I think I sleep pretty good. I don't lose sleep over any positions.
Maybe a better question might be: What was the worst day I ever had?
Okay, what was the worst day you ever had?
One day I lost about $4 to 5 million.
What happened on that day?
I don't even remember. The reality is that if you trade long enough
everything happens.
What is gut feel? It is just an expression for intelligence that we
can't explain. I have seen gut feel firsthand in a number of traders—
traders who can view the same information as everyone else and
somehow see clearly which direction the market is likely to go.
Watching Steve Cohen, you are left with the unmistakable impres-
sion that he has a real sense of where the market is headed. This
sense, or gut feel, is nothing more that a distillation of the experi-
ences and lessons drawn from tens of thousands of trades. It is the
trader as a human computer.
So-called gut feel is a combination of experience and talent. It
cannot be taught. Novice traders cannot expect to have gut feel, and
experienced traders may also not possess it. Even many of the Mar-
ket Wizards don't possess gut feel; in many cases, their trading suc-
cess is due to a different talent—for example, a skill for market
analysis or system building.
Although Steve Cohen's trading style cannot be emulated, his
trading disciplines can. Insofar as Cohen's behavior demonstrates
some of the key attributes of the successful trader, the accounts of
his trading experiences contain important information even for the
beginning trader. For example, Cohen provides an excellent model of
the expert trader's approach to risk control.
As good as he is, Cohen makes mistakes too—sometimes big
ones. Consider the trade in which he shorted IBM before an earn-
ings report. He was dead wrong on his expectations, and the stock
gapped up $18 against him in the first trades after the report's
release. Since his reason lor placing the trade had been violated,
Cohen covered his position immediately. He didn't try to rationalize
the situation; he didn't give the market a little more time. Although
he took a sizable loss, had he waited just until the next morning, the
stock would have gone another $[() against him. All traders make
mistakes; the great traders, however, limit the damage.
For Cohen, cutting losses is almost a re Hex action. Although
developing such loss control skills usually takes many years of experi-
ence, Cohen offers one piece of related advice that should be as use-
ful to the novice as to the professional: "If you think you're wrong, or
if the market is moving against you and you don't know why, take in
half. You can always put it on again."
Another important lesson provided by Cohen is that it is critical
that your style of trading match your personality. There is no single
right way to trade the markets. Know who you are. For example,
don't try to be both an investor and a day trader. Choose an approach
that is comfortable for you.
Cohen also advises that it is important to make sure you have a
good reason for pulling on a trade. Buying a stock because it is "too
low" or selling it because il is "too high" is not a good reason. If that
is the extent of your analysis, there is no reason why you should
expect to win in the markets.
Being a great trader is a process, ft's a race with no finish line.
'Hit- markets are not static. No single style or approach can provide
superior results over long periods of time. To continue to outper-
form, the great traders continue to learn and adapt. Cohen con-
stantly tries to learn more about the markets—to expand his
expertise to encompass additional stocks, sectors, and styles of trad-
ing. As Cohen explains, trading for him is an evolutionary process.


--- PAGE 152 ---
ARI KIEV. M.D.
The Mind of a Winner
An Kiev Is not a Market Wizard; he is not even a trader. Why then should
you pay attention to his advice? Because Steve Cohen, who is unques-
tionably one of the world's greatest traders (sec interview in this book),
thinks enough of Doctor Kiev to have made him a permanent fixture at
his firm, S.A.C. Doctor Kiev began working with traders at S.A.C. in
1992, conducting weekly seminars. This role steadily expanded over the
years, and he now spends three full days each week at S.A.C, working
with traders both individually and within groups. He also consults with a
small number of professional traders at other firms.
Doctor Kiev graduated Harvard and received his medical degree at
Cornell. After a residency at Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Maudsley
Hospital in London and serving as a research associate at Columbia, he
returned to Cornell Medical College to head their social psychiatry
department, focusing on suicide prevention research. In 1970, he
founded the Social Psychiatry Research Institute, which participated in
major trials of the antidepressant drugs, such as Pro?.ac, Paxil, Zoloft, and
Celexa, among others.
Doctor Kiev was the first psychiatrist appointed to the U.S. Olympic
Sports Medicine Committee and worked with Olympic athletes during
1977—82. It was his work in helping Olympic athletes enhance their per-
formance that years later attracted Steve Cohen's attention, because
Cohen believed that there were strong parallels between top athletes and
top traders.
Doctor Kiev has authored fourteen books, including TraJiMg to Ww,
(kg Psychology of Mostcrmg tbc Markets, and the forthcoming TraJiwg iw
288
T H E MIND OF A W I N N E R
the Zone, based on his experience working with professional traders; the
best-selling A Strategy for Daily Living and a popular anthropology text,
Magic, Faith, and Healing: Studies in Primitive Psychiatry Today.
I interviewed Doctor Kiev at his Manhattan office. (No, I didn't ask
him to lie down on the couch.)
You began your career working with suicidal and depressed
patients and then ended up working with Olympic athletes and
traders. That's quite a transition. It doesn't sound like there
would be much of a connection.
One of the therapies for depressed and suicidal patients is to help
them become more sell-reliant and assertive. These same skills are
applicable to athletes and traders as well.
How did you get involved in working with Olympic athletes?
My kids went to a health club that was run by the head of the U.S.
Olympic Sports Medicine Committee, and I met some Olympic ath-
letes there. As a result of that association, 1 became the first psychia-
trist on the committee.
What sports did the athletes you worked with participate in?
Bobsledcling—my son was on the U.S. world team in 1981—basket-
ball, archery, fencing, kayaking, sculling, and a number of others.
That's quite a range of sports. Are there common denominators
among the sports or are different approaches required for differ-
ent types of athletes?
There are some common denominators, but different sports require
different mental frameworks. For example, in bobsledding, you need
to start off with a maximum amount oi exertion as you run and push
the sled. But as soon as you get into the sled, you have to slow down
your adrenaline so that you are calm and centered while steering the
sled down the course. A similar transition is required in the biathlon,
where the athletes race on cross-country skis, with their heart rate
exceeding 120 beats per minute, and then have to stop and focus on
shooting a target, with their heartbeat ideally slowing clown to 40
beats per minute. These types of athletes can condition themselves
by practicing abrupt mental shifts between exertion and relaxation.


--- PAGE 153 ---
AfiiilEV, M.D.
In a sport like archery, however, the critical element is for the ath-
letes to be able to empty their minds. For example, I worked with an
archer who had won the gold medal in the previous Olympics, and
that achievement was interfering with his ability to have his mind
totally empty and centered on the target. He needed to develop the
skill of letting go of the thought of his previous gold medal win so that
he could be relaxed and completely focused on the target.
How do you accomplish that?
By relaxation and imagery. There are many techniques, but the essen-
tial idea is that you want to notice a thought and then let it go. For
example, you might picture, the thought in a bubble and then visualize
it lading off and disappearing.
Are there some winning traits that are common across all sports?
In any sport, it's very difficult to win a gold medal unless you decide
you're going to win it. Making the Olympic team and winning a gold
medal may be a ten-year quest. If you're going to make it, then you
have to start today to do those things that are compatible with what
someone who is performing at that level is doing. Most people don't
believe it is possible and settle for not succeeding, or at least not suc-
ceeding at the level they have chosen. You have to be willing to put
yourself on the line and go for it, even with the thought that you will
feel humiliated if you don't make it after you have promised that you
would.
Promised yourself or promised the world?
Promised the world—that makes it much more powerful. Promising
the result commits you to doing it and leaves you no alternative but to
do it if you are going to live by your word. Letting others know that
you have set a goal and are committed to achieving it makes it more
likely you will achieve that goal, whether it is in the realm of athletics,
trading, or something else.
One procedure I introduced at S.A.C. seven years ago was to go
around the room and have each trader promise his results. In the
early years, I got a lot of resistance from just about everyone except
Steve Cohen, who was always very willing to promise an extraordinary
result. It took a long time lor people to accept this process, but now it
is ama/ing how much it has become part of the company culture.
MIND OF A WiNfl!
Almost everyone is willing to commit to making more than he or she
did in the previous year, often promising to double the amount. It's
not a matter of making positive affirmations; the key is promising to
do something, and then on a daily basis doing what you need to do to
realize that result.
Steve Cohen set a target for this year that was off the charts. He
had to plan a strategy consistent with that target. He starts working at
four in the afternoon on Sunday and works until ten that night. "I
don't want to do that," he says, "but I have to in order to play at this
level. I don't want to come into the office at seven-thirty every morn-
ing. I don't want to go through all these charts every night. But it's
what I have to do if I'm going to be true to my goal."
Are you implying that simply committing to a higher target
makes it possible?
Believing that an outcome is possible makes it achievable. The classic
example is Roger Bannister's penetration of the four-minute mile
mark. Before he ran his sub-four-minute mile in 1954, this feat was
considered an impossible barrier that was beyond human physical
capabilities. After he ran his so-called magic mile, many other run-
ners suddenly began breaking this once seemingly impossible barrier.
As the barriers are being broken down by Steve, other traders at
his firm are discovering that they can make a lot more than they once
thought possible. One trader who was a clerk five years ago is on tar-
get to make $70 million this year.
What are the implications of setting a target and then not reach-
ing it? Certainly not everyone who sets a higher target makes it.
The objective of setting a target is not necessarily to reach it, but
rather to establish a standard against which to measure your perform-
ance. If you are not reaching your target, it forces you to focus on
what you are doing wrong or what you may not be doing that you
should. The target holds you to a higher standard of performance.
Why do some athletes or traders excel, whereas others with
equal skill manage only moderate success?
Sometimes when people reach their target and nothing happens, they
stop paying attention to whatever the commitment was to get there.
This explains why some people begin to lose after they succeed. They


--- PAGE 154 ---
A R I K I E V , M.D,
can't sustain the effort. When someone achieves his goal, the ques-
tion is often, "What now?" My answer, which is based on comparing
athletes who have won gold medals with those who haven't, is to set
up another target that will provide a challenge. The gold medal win-
ners are always stretching for a goal that is uncertain.
Failing to redefine the goal can limit success. For example, one ski
jumper prepared for the Olympic trials for years by visualizing himself
doing perfect jumps over and over. He came to the trials, made the
perfect jump, and achieved his goal of making the Olympic team. The
problem was that the qualifying jumps ended up being his best per-
formance because he hadn't visualized or mentally prepared himself
for going beyond the trials.
Some traders have trouble maintaining the discipline that made
them successful once they get ahead by a certain amount. One trader I
worked with did well at the beginning of each month, but whenever he
got ahead by $300,000, he would revert to bad habits. When I pressed
him to explain the reasons for the deterioration in his performance dur-
ing the latter part of each month, he said, "I begin trading each month
from the perspective that I am flat. Therefore, I am very selective about
my trades and use strict risk control. Once there is money in the till, I
get lax. I become overconfident. I stop having respect for the market."
What else impedes skilled athletes and traders from excelling?
There are people who hold the world record but have never won a
gold medal. One athlete held the world record in his event and par-
ticipated in four Olympics, but never won the gold medal. It turns out
that the time he set the world record, he had a beesting that dis-
tracted him from thoughts like: "I'm not winning. I have to win."
Is there an applicable lesson to trading?
Yes, being preoccupied with not losing interferes with winning. Trad-
ing not to lose is not a good strategy. You need to trade to win.
How did you get involved working with traders?
Steve Cohen had heard of my work with Olympic athletes and
thought it would be relevant to traders. I've been working with his
firm for seven years. When I started, they were a $25 million hedge
fund; they have now grown to $1.5 billion. I know that you inter-
viewed Steve Cohen. I'm curious, what was your impression of him?
I was struck by his casualness in trading. He was throwing out
100,000-share orders with the same level of emotion that he
might use ordering a sandwich for lunch. He also seemed to
maintain a constant sense of humor while trading. Another
thing I noticed about Steve that I've also seen in a number of
other great traders is that he can look at the same one hundred
facts everyone else sees—some of which are bullish and some of
which are bearish—and somehow pick out the one or two ele-
ments that are most relevant to the market at that moment in
time.
You saw that? I think part of it is preparation and part of it is experi-
ence. The trades he's doing are not new trades. He has a vast reper-
toire of trades and is able to access them. Great traders like Steve are
also able to notice when the sweet spot is visible and to pile in.
According to S.A.C.'s risk manager's statistics, 5 percent of his trades
account for virtually all of his profits. He is also willing to cut his posi-
tion when he is wrong.
Do you work with just professional traders, or do you also work
with ordinary people who want to become successful traders?
Just professional traders. I see myself as a trading coach—helping
someone who is a trader improve, not teaching someone who is not a
trader to be a trader. My job is to diagnose how a trader might be
trapped by his own emotional response to the market and then help
tweak his approach to correct the problem.
For example.
One trader came to me and said, "When I'm winning, I keep win-
ning—I can do no wrong; when I'm losing, I keep losing—I can't do
anything right." The solution was to create the same state of mind
when he was losing as when he was winning.
How do you do that?
By getting him to re-create the same mind-set that he has on a win-
ning streak. When he is on a winning streak, he is fearless, intuitive,
and makes the right choices. When he is on a losing streak, he needs
to visualize, remember, and feel those same positive traits so that
when he comes into the office, he has the same attitude toward his
trading as when he is in the middle of a winning streak. You repeat-


--- PAGE 155 ---
fUE MIND OF A W I N N E R
edly hear traders say that when they are in a hot streak, they ean do
no wrong. I'm suggesting that people ean re-create that hot streak in
their mind.
Is that what you did with athletes as well—get them to imagine
doing their particular event perfectly?
I once worked with an ice skater who couldn't do a triple jump.
Every time he attempted the third turn, he would l a l i . I asked him if
he could begin to do it in his mind. At first, when he attempted
doing it in his mind, he would also fall, i had him keep practicing
the jump in his mind until he felt comlortable doing it mentally. In
order to be able to do it physically on the ice, he had to first have a
mental image of his doing the jump successfully. Not long alter he
became comfortable doing the jump in his mind, he was able to do it
on the ice.
Another athlete I worked with was a bobsled driver who had
crashed at Zigzag in Lake Placid, which is a ninety-degree turn. Sub-
sequently, every time he made that turn, he overcompensatecl. 1 had
him visualize the perfect run. The actual bobsled run lakes about a
minute, and you can run through the entire course in your mind in
about ten seconds. He practiced coming clown the period route in
his mind hundreds of times. This mental imaging allowed him to
overcome his anxiety, and he was ultimately able to make the turn
without overcompensating.
I don't want to make this sound simple or magical. 1 don't mean to
suggest that all that is involved is learning some set ol visualization
techniques. What I do is better described as a dialogue process to
find out what is impeding a person's performance.
Do people know the answer to that question?
They frequently do. I worked with one trader who whenever he
decided it was time to liquidate his position would hold on to a small
part of it, just in case the market continued to move in his direction.
On balance, these remnant positions were costing him money. He
had to learn to get rid of his entire position when he decided it was
time to liquidate, which at first was anxiety producing.
I'm not trying to badger people. I'm just trying to get them to do
what is in their best self-interest. Human beings want to feel com-
fortable. My job is to be a bit of a gadfly so that I can get them to
make the necessary changes.
Any other examples of personal flaws that prevented a trader
from reaching his full potential?
One trader who runs a large hedge fund is never willing to buy a stock
at the market; he is always trying to bid it lower. As a result, he misses
a lot of trades.
How did this flaw come to light?
I asked him, "How did things go today?"
"Not so good. I just missed getting into a big trade in XYZ. I tried
to buy it, but I couldn't get into the position because the price was too
high. I put in a bid, but the market was already up one dollar, and I
didn't want to pay up for it."
I'm trying to get him into a different mental perspective. He has
been successful for a number of years. He wins on the vast majority
of his trades. Why is he being such a penny-pincher?
Why do you think he is?
I think that's his personality. It's the way he was brought up. He nickels-
and-dimes everything.
And it's getting in his way?
It's getting in his way of greater success. All I'm trying to do is hear
where a trader is at and then help him see what is holding him back.
What is another example of a behavioral pattern that was hold-
ing a trader back?
One trader selected his stocks fundamentally and then scaled into
the position as the stock declined. Even though he had chosen to
enter his positions by averaging down, when a stock got back to even,
he was so relieved that he would often get out.
Didn't he realize that his entry approach would always lead to an
initial loss?
He knew it intellectually, but psychologically he was still experiencing
it as a loss. Therefore, when a stock got back to even, he was just glad
to get out. The first step was to get him to perceive what he was
doing. Now he can stay in much longer. Consciousness is one of the


--- PAGE 156 ---
A R I K I E V , M . D .
most critical tools I use. In this case, the trader needed to be con-
fronted because he was fooling himself.
Did he change what he was doing?
Yes, he now catches himself when he is tempted to get out of a stock
when it goes back to even. Not only does he catch it, but I can iden-
tify this same tendency in other traders.
Has his trading improved as a result?
Dramatically. Last year he made $28 million. At the start of this year,
I asked him, "What is your goal for this year?"
"Fifty [million]," he answered.
"Fifty?" I asked.
"Well . . ."
I hear that "well" and I say, "Let's amplify that well. How much is
in the well?"
"I probably could make more."
"How much more?" I asked
"I don't want to say," he replied.
"Come on, say it."
"I don't want to say it, or else you'll make me do it."
"I'm not going to make you do it. But how much do you think you
could make?"
"I think I can make a hundred," he whispered.
"Well, then say it."
"Okay, I'm going to make a hundred."
I tell him, "We're going to get the guys who work with you in here.
We call them in and he says, "I was just talking to Ari and we're
going to make one hundred million this year."
Three weeks ago he came in and told me that he had reached a
hundred million for the year. The key was getting him to recognize his
own hesitation when he said that fifty million was his target. If the
conversation had ended there, he would not have made a hundred
million. There had to be an exchange for me to sense where he was
really at. One hundred million wasn't my number; it was my number
for him. If there's anything unique in what I do, it's hearing that bit of
uncertainty that reflects where a trader is holding back.
IHE M I N D OF A W I N N E R
You've written an entire book about the psychology of trading.
What if I asked you for your advice on how to win at trading, but
required you to say it in twenty-five words or less.
Define a target, a strategy consistent with the target, a set of disci-
plines to follow, and risk management guidelines. Then trade, track,
and evaluate your performance.
Doctor Kiev's advice regarding goal achievement in general and
trading success in particular can be summarized as follows:
> Believing makes it possible.
> To achieve a goal, you not only have to believe it is possible, but
you also have to commit to achieving it.
>• A commitment that promises the goal to others is more power-
ful than a commitment made to oneself.
> Extraordinary performers—Olympic gold medal winners, super-
traders—continually redefine their goals so they are a stretch.
Maintaining exceptional performance requires leaving the
comfort zone.
*• After setting a goal, the trader or athlete needs to define a strat-
egy that is consistent with the target.
> Traders, athletes, and other goal-oriented individuals need to
monitor their performance to make sure they are on track with
their target and to diagnose what is holding them back if they
are not.


--- PAGE 157 ---
WIZARD LESSONS
1. There Is No Single True Path
There is no single true path for succeeding in the markets. The methods
employed by great traders are extraordinarily diverse. Some are pure fun-
damentalists; others use only technical analysis; and still others combine
the two methodologies. Some traders consider two days to be long term,
while others consider two months to be short-term. Some are highly
quantitative, while others rely primarily on qualitative market decisions.
2. The Universal Trait
Although the traders interviewed differed dramatically in terms of their
methods, backgrounds, and personalities, there were numerous traits
common to many of them. One trait that was shared by all the traders is
discipline.
Successful trading is essentially a two-stage process:
1. Develop an effective trading strategy and an accompanying trading
plan that addresses all contingencies.
2. Follow the plan without exception. (By definition, any valid reason for an
exception—for example, correcting an oversight—would become part of
the plan.) No matter how sound the trading strategy, its success will
depend on this execution phase, which requires absolute discipline.
3. You Have to Trade Your Personality
Cohen emphasizes that it is critical to adopt a trading style that matches
your personality. There is no single right way to trade the markets; you
have to know who you are. For example, don't try to be both an investor
298
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
and a day trader. Choose an approach that is comfortable for you. Min-
ervini offers similar advice: "Concentrate on mastering one style that
suits your personality, which is a lifetime process."
Successful traders invariably gravitate to an approach that fits their per-
sonality. For example, Cook is happy to take a small profit on a trade but
hates to take even a small loss. Given this predisposition, the methodolo-
gies he has developed, which accept a low return/risk ratio on each trade in
exchange for a high probability of winning, are right for him. These same
methods, however, could be a mismatch for others. Trading is not a one-
size-fits-all proposition; each trader must tailor an individual approach.
4. Failure and Perseverance
Although some of the traders in this book were successful from the start,
the early market experiences of others were marked by complete failure.
Mark Cook not only lost his entire trading stake several times, but on one
of these occasions he also ended up several hundred thousand dollars in
debt and a hair away from personal bankruptcy. Stuart Walton wiped out
once with money borrowed from his father and several years later came
close to losing not only all his trading capital, but also the money he bor-
rowed on a home equity loan. Mark Minervini lost not only all his own
money in the markets, but some borrowed money as well.
Despite their horrendous beginnings, these traders ultimately went
on to spectacular success. How were they able to achieve such a com-
plete metamorphosis? Of course, part of the answer is that they had the
inner strength not to be defeated by defeat. But tenacity without flexibil-
ity is no virtue. Had they continued to do what they had been doing
before, they would have experienced the same results. The key is that
they completely changed what they were doing.
5. Great Traders Are Marked by Their Flexibility
Even great traders sometimes have completely wrongheaded ideas when
they start. They ultimately succeed, however, because they have the flex-
ibility to change their approach. Benjamin Franklin said, "One of the
greatest tragedies of life is the murder of a beautiful theory by a gang of
brutal facts." Great traders are able to face such "tragedies" and choose
reality over their preconceptions.


--- PAGE 158 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
Walton, for example, started out by selling powerhouse stocks and
buying bargain stocks. When his empirical observations of what actually
worked in the market contradicted this original inclination, he was flexi-
ble enough to completely reverse his approach. As another example,
when Minervini was a novice trader he favored buying low-priced stocks
that were making new lows, an approach that was almost precisely the
opposite of the methodology he ended up using.
Markets are dynamic. Approaches that work in one period may cease
to work in another. Success in the markets requires the ability to adapt to
changing conditions and altered realities. Some examples:
*• Walton adjusts his strategy to fit his perception of the prevailing mar-
ket environment. As a result, he might be a buyer of momentum
stocks in one year and a buyer of value stocks in another. "My philos-
ophy" he says, "is to float like a jellyfish, and let the market push me
where it wants to go."
>• Even though Lescarbeau has developed systems whose performance
almost defy belief, he continues his research to develop their replace-
ments so that he is prepared when market conditions change.
>• Fletcher's primary current strategy evolved in several stages from a
much simpler earlier strategy. As competitors increase in the cur-
rent approaches he is utilizing, Fletcher is busy developing new
strategies.
^ Cohen says, "I'm always learning, which keeps it exciting and new.
I'm not doing the same thing that I was doing ten years ago. I have
evolved, and will continue to evolve."
6. It Requires Time to Become a Successful Trader
Experience is a minimum requirement for success in trading, just as it is
in any other profession, and experience can be acquired only in real time.
As Cook says, "You can't expect to become a doctor or an attorney
overnight, and trading is no different."
7. Keep a Record of Your Market Observations
Although the process of gaining experience can't be rushed, it can be
made much more efficient by writing down market observations instead
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
of depending on memory. Keeping a daily diary in which he recorded the
recurrent patterns he noticed in the market was instrumental to Cook's
transition from failure to great success. All of the many trading strategies
he uses grew out of these notes. Masters jots down observations on the
backs of his business cards. A compilation of these notes provided the
basis for his trading model.
8. Develop a Trading Philosophy
Develop a specific trading philosophy—an integration of market con-
cepts and trading methods—that is based on your market experience and
is consistent with your personality (item 3). Developing a trading philos-
ophy is a dynamic process—as you gather more experience and'knowl-
edge, the existing philosophy should be revised accordingly.
9. What Is Your Edge?
Unless you can answer this question clearly and decisively, you are not
ready to trade. Every trader in this book has a specific edge. Here are a
few examples:
>• Masters has developed a catalyst-based model that identifies high
probability trades.
>• Lauer employs a specific six-step selection process that identifies
stocks with extremely favorable return/risk prospects.
>• Cook has identified price patterns that correctly predict the short-
term direction of the market approximately 85 percent of the
time.
»• Cohen combines the information flow provided by the select group of
traders and analysts he has assembled with his innate timing skills as
a trader.
> A tremendous investment in research and very low transactions costs
have made it possible for Shaw's firm to identify and profit from small
market inefficiencies.
>• By combining carefully structured financing deals with hedging
techniques, Fletcher and Guazzoni implement transactions that
have a very high probability of being profitable in virtually any sce-
nario.


--- PAGE 159 ---
(^ 
Watson's extensive communication-based research allows him to
identify overlooked stocks that are likely to advance sharply well
before those opportunities become well recognized on Wall
Street.
10. The Confidence Chicken-and-Egg Question
One of the most strikingly evident traits among all the Market Wizards is
their high level of confidence. This leads to the question: Are they confi-
dent because they have done so well, or is their success a consequence of
their confidence? Of course, it would hardly be surprising that anyone
who has done as extraordinarily well as the traders in this book would be
confident. But the more interviews f do with Market Wizard types, the
more convinced I become that confidence is an inherent trait shared by
these traders, and is as much a contributing factor to their success as a
consequence of it. To cite only a few of the many possible examples:
^ When Watson was asked what gave him the confidence to pursue a
career in money management when he had no prior success picking
stocks, he replied, "Once I decide 1 am going to do something, I
become determined to succeed, regardless of the obstacles. If 1 didn't
have that attitude, I never would have made it.'
^ Masters, who launched his fund when he was an unemployed stock-
broker with virtually no track record gave this response to a similar
question. "I realized that if somebody could make money trading, so
could I. Also, the fact that I had competed successfully at the highest
levels of swimming gave me confidence that I could excel in this busi-
ness as well."
K Lauer was almost apologetic about his confidence when he decided
to switch careers from analyst to money manager: "I hesitate to say
this because 1 don't, want to sound arrogant—one of the things that
gave me confidence in going out on my own was that the fund man-
agers were my clients when 1 was an analyst, and 1 thought they
would not be particularly difficult to compete against."
*• Lescarbeau's confidence seemed to border on the irrational. When
asked why he didn't delay a split with his partner, who was the money
manager of the team, until he had developed his own approach,
Lescarbeau replied, "I knew I would come up with something. There
i/lZARD L E S S O N S
was absolutely no doubt in my mind. I had never failed to succeed at
anything that I put my mind to, and this was no different."
An honest self-appraisal in respect to confidence may be one of the
best predictors of a trader's prospects for success in the markets. At the
very least, those who consider changing careers to become traders or
risking a sizable portion of their assets in the market should ask them-
selves whether they have absolute confidence in their ultimate success.
Any hesitation in the answer should be viewed as a cautionary flag.
11. Hard Work
The irony is that so many people are drawn to the markets because it
seems like an easy way to make a lot of money, yet those who excel tend
to be extraordinarily hard workers—almost to a fault. Consider just some
of the examples in this book:
>• As if running a huge trading company were not enough, Shaw has
also founded a number of successful technology companies, provided
venture capital funding and support to two computational chemistry
software firms, and chaired a presidential advisory committee. Even
when he is on a rare vacation, he acknowledges, "I need a few hours
of work each day just to keep myself sane."
^ Lescarbeau continues to spend long hours doing computer research
even though his systems, which require very little time to run, are
performing spectacularly well. He continues to work as if these sys-
tems were about to become ineffective tomorrow. He never misses a
market day, to the point of hobbling across his house in pain on the
day of his knee surgery so that he could check on the markets.
*• Minervini works six-day workweeks, fourteen-hour trading days, and
claims not to have missed a market day in ten years, even when he
had pneumonia.
> Cook continues to do regular farmwork in addition to spending fifty
to sixty hours a week at trading. Moreover, for years after the disas-
trous trade that brought him to the brink of bankruptcy, Cook worked
the equivalent of two full-time jobs.
> Bender not only spends a full day trading in the U.S. markets, but
then is up half the night trading the Japanese stock market.


--- PAGE 160 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
12. Obsessiveness
There is often a fine line between hard work and obsession, a line that is
frequently crossed by the Market Wizards. Certainly some of the exam-
ples just cited contain elements of obsession. It may well be that a ten-
dency toward obsessiveness in respect to the markets, and often other
endeavors as well, is simply a trait associated with success.
15. The Market Wizards Tend to Be Innovators, Not Followers
To list a few examples:
> WTien Fletcher started his first job, he was given a desk and told to
"figure it out." He never stopped. Fletcher has made a career of think-
ing up and implementing innovative market strategies.
*• Bender not only developed his own style of trading options but also
created an approach that sought to profit by betting against conven-
tional option models.
*• Shaw's entire life has been defined by innovation: the software com-
pany he launched as a graduate student; his pioneering work in
designing the architecture of supercomputers; the various companies
he founded; and his central role in developing the unique complex
mathematical trading model used by D. E. Shaw.
>• By compiling detailed daily diaries of his market observations for over
a decade, Cook was able to develop a slew of original, high-reliability
trading strategies.
^ Minervini uncovered his own menagerie of chart patterns rather than
using the patterns popularized in market books.
*• By jotting down all his market observations, Masters was able to
design his own catalyst-based trading model.
> Although he was secretive about the details, based on their incredible
performance alone, it is quite clear that Lescarbeau's systems are
unique.
14. To Be a Winner You Have to Be Willing to Take a Loss
In Watson's words, "You can't be afraid to take a loss. The people who
are successful in this business are the people who are willing to lose
money."
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
15. Risk Control
Minervini believes that one of the common mistakes made by novices is
that they "spend too much time trying to discover great entry strategies
and not enough time on money management." "Containing your losses,"
he says, "is 90 percent of the battle, regardless of the strategy." Cohen
explains the importance of limiting losses as follows: "Most traders make
money only in the 50 to 55 percent range. My best trader makes money
only 63 percent of the time. That means you're going to be wrong a lot.
If that's the case, you better make sure your losses are as small as they
can be."
Risk-control methods used by the traders interviewed included the
following:
Stop-loss points. Both Minervini and Cook predetermine where
they will get out of a trade that goes against them. This approach allows
them to limit the potential loss on any position to a well-defined risk
level (barring a huge overnight price move). Both Minervini and Cook
indicated that the stop point for any trade depends on the expected
gain—that is, trades with greater profit potential will use wider stops
(accept more risk).
Reducing the position. Cook has a sheet taped to his computer
reading: GET SMALLER. "The first thing I do when I'm losing," he says, "is
to stop the bleeding." Cohen expresses the virtually identical sentiment:
"If you think you're wrong, or if the market is moving against you and you
don't know why, take in half. You can always put it on again. If you do
that twice, you've taken in three-quarters of your position. Then what's
left is no longer a big deal."
Selecting low-risk positions. Some traders rely on very restrictive
stock selection conditions to control risk as an alternative to stop-loss liq-
uidation or position reduction (detailed in item 17).
Limiting the initial position size. Cohen cautions, "A common
mistake traders make ... is that they take on too big of a position relative
to their portfolio. Then when the stock moves against them, the pain
becomes too great to handle, and they end up panicking or freezing." On
a similar note, Fletcher quotes his mentor, Elliot Wolk, "Never make a
bet you can't afford to lose."


--- PAGE 161 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
Diversification. The more diversified the holdings, the lower the
risk. Diversification by itself, however, is not a sufficient risk-control
measure, because of the significant correlation of most stocks to the
broader market and hence to one another. Also, as discussed in item 53,
too much diversification can have significant drawbacks.
Short selling. Although the common perception is that short selling
is risky, it can actually be an effective tool for reducing portfolio risk (see
item 59).
Hedged Strategies. Some traders (Fletcher, Guazzoni, Shaw, and
Bender) use methodologies in which positions are hedged from the
onset. For these traders, risk control is a matter of restricting leverage,
since even a low-risk strategy can become a high-risk trade if the leverage
is excessive. (See, for example, discussion of LTCM in the Shaw inter-
view.)
16. You Can't Be Afraid of Risk
Risk control should not be confused with fear of risk. A willingness to
accept risk is probably an essential personality trait for a trader. As Wat-
son states, "You have to be willing to accept a certain level of risk, or else
you will never pull the trigger." When asked what he looks for when he
hires new traders, Cohen replies, "I'm looking for people who are not
afraid to take risks."
17. Limiting the Downside by Focusing on Undervalued Stocks
A number of the traders interviewed restrict their stock selection to the
universe of undervalued securities. Watson focuses on the stocks with
relatively low price/earnings ratios (8 to 12). Lauer will look for stocks
that have witnessed market-adjusted declines of at least 50 percent.
Okumus buys stocks that have declined 60 percent or more off their
highs and are trading at price/earnings ratios under 12. He also prefers to
buy stocks with prices as close as possible to book value.
One reason all these traders focus on buying stocks that meet their
definition of value is that by doing so they limit the downside. As Lauer
explains when talking about using a large price decline as a selection
screen, "Right now, I'm only focusing on the question of how I make sure
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
I don't lose money. I'm not talking about making money yet." Another
advantage of buying stocks that are trading at depressed levels is that the
stocks in this group that do turn around will often have tremendous
upside potential.
18. Value Alone Is Not Enough
It should be stressed that although a number of traders considered
undervaluation a necessary condition for purchasing a stock, none of
them viewed it as a sufficient condition. There always had to be other
compelling reasons for the trade, because a stock could be low priced
and stay that way for years. Even if you don't lose much in buying a
value stock that just sits there, it could represent a serious investment
blunder by tying up capital that can be used much more effectively else-
where.
19. The Importance of Catalysts
Lauer has six selection criteria, but five are defensive in nature, aimed at
capital preservation. All five of these factors can be in place and he would
not consider purchasing a stock without the sixth—a catalyst. "The key
question," he says, is "what is going to make the stock go up?"
Watson's stock selection process contains two essential steps. First,
the identification of stocks that fulfill his value criteria, which is the easy
part of the process and merely defines the universe of stocks in which he
prospects for buy candidates. Second, the search for catalysts (recent or
impending) that will identify which of these value stocks have a com-
pelling reason to move higher over the near term. To discover these cata-
lysts, he conducts extensive communication with companies, as well as
their competitors, distributors, and consumers. By definition, every trade
requires a catalyst.
Masters has developed an entire trading model based primarily on
catalysts. Through years of research and observation, he has been able to
find scores of patterns in how stocks respond to catalysts. Although most
of these patterns may provide only a small edge by themselves, when
grouped together, they help identify high-probability trades.


--- PAGE 162 ---
W I Z A R D IfSSQlNS
20. Most Novice Traders Focus on When to Get in and Forget About When
to Get Out
When to get out of a position is as important as when to get in. Any mar-
ket strategy that ignores trade liquidation is by definition incomplete. A
liquidation strategy can include one or more of the following elements:
Stop-loss points. Detailed in item 15.
Profit objective. A number of traders interviewed (e.g., Okumus,
Cook) will liquidate a stock (or index) if the market reaches their prede-
termined profit target.
Time stop. A stock (or index) is liquidated if it fails to reach a target
within a specified time frame. Both Masters and Cook cited time stops
as a helpful trading strategy.
Violation of trade premise. A trade is immediately liquidated if the
reason for its implementation is contradicted. For example, when IBM,
which Cohen shorted in anticipation of poor earnings, reported better-
than-expected earnings, Cohen immediately covered his position.
Although he still took a large loss on the trade, the loss would have been
significantly greater if he had hesitated.
Counter-to-anticipated market behavior. (See item 21.)
Portfolio considerations. (See item 22.)
Some of these elements may make sense for all traders (e.g., exiting
on counter-to-anticipated market behavior); others are very dependent
on a trader's style. For example, the use of stops to limit losses is essen-
tial to Minervini, who uses a timing-based methodology, but is contra-
dictory to the approach used by Lauer, Okumus, and Watson, who
tend to buy undervalued stocks after very sharp declines. (The latter
traders, however, would still use stop-loss strategies for short positions,
which are subject to open-ended losses.) As another example, profit
objectives, which are an integral part of some traders' methodologies,
could be detrimental to other traders and investors by limiting profit
potential.
21. If Market Behavior Doesn't Conform to Expectations, Get Out
A number of traders mentioned that if the market fails to respond to an
event (e.g., earnings report) as expected, they will view it as evidence that
they are wrong and liquidate their position. For example, when Intel
W I Z A R D L E S S O N
reported lower earnings, as Lauer anticipated, but then rallied anyway,
Lauer covered his short position. In his words: "I may think [it's] ridicu-
lous, but if the news I expected is out, and the market still does not
respond as I had anticipated, I am not going to fight it."
When 1 interviewed Cohen, he was bullish on the bond market,
which at the time was in a long-term decline. He gave me a number of
reasons why he believed the bond market would witness a substantial
rebound in the ensuing months, and he implemented a long position as I
sat next to him. Over the following few days, the bond market did indeed
witness a bounce, but the rally soon faltered, with bond prices sliding to
new lows. When I spoke to Cohen on a follow-up phone interview a
week after my visit to his firm, I asked him whether he was still long the
bond market, which he had been so bullish on several weeks earlier.
"No," Cohen replied, "you trade your theory and then let the market tell
you whether you are right."
22. The Question of When to Liquidate Depends Not Only on the Stock but
Also on Whether a Better Investment Can Be Identified
Investable funds are finite. Continuing to hold one stock position pre-
cludes using those funds to purchase another stock. Therefore, it may
often make sense to liquidate an investment that still looks sound if an
even better investment opportunity exists.
Watson, for example, employs what he calls a pig-at-the-trough phi-
losophy. He is constantly upgrading his portfolio—replacing stocks that
he still expects will go higher with other stocks that appear to have an
even better return/risk outlook. Similarly, Lauer will often liquidate a
stock after it achieves his target of a double, even if he still believes it has
significant upside potential, because by that point he will usually be able
to identify a better investment opportunity.
Thus, the key question an investor needs to ask regarding a current
holding is not "Will the stock move higher?" but rather "Is this stock still a
better investment than any other equity I can hold with the same capital?"
23. The Virtue of Patience
Whatever criteria you use to select a stock and determine an entry level,
you need to have the patience to wait for those conditions to be met. For


--- PAGE 163 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S ;
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
example, Okumus will patiently wait for a stock to decline to his "bargain"
price level, even if it means missing more than 80 percent of the stocks
he wants to buy. In mid-1999, Okumus was only 13 percent invested
because, as he stated at the time, "There are no bargains around. I'm not
risking the money I'm investing until 1 find stocks that are very cheap."
24. The Importance of Setting Goals
Doctor Kiev, who has worked with both Olympic athletes and profes-
sional traders, is a strong advocate of the power of setting goals. He con-
tends that believing that an outcome is possible makes it achievable.
Believing in a goal, however, is not sufficient. To achieve a goal, Kiev
says, you need not only to believe in it, but also to commit to it. Promis-
ing results to others, he maintains, is particularly effective.
Doctor Kiev stresses that exceptional performance requires setting
goals that are outside a trader's comfort zone. Thus, the trader seeking to
excel needs to continually redefine goals so that they are always a stretch.
Traders also need to monitor their performance to make sure they are on
track toward reaching their goals and to diagnose what is holding them
back if they are not.
25. This Time Is Never Different
Every time there is a market mania, the refrain is heard, "This time is dif-
ferent," followed by some explanation of why the particular bull market
will continue, despite already stratospheric prices. When gold soared to
near $1,000 an ounce in 1980, the explanation was that gold was "dif-
ferent from every other commodity." Supposedly, the ordinary laws of
supply and demand did not apply to gold because of its special role as a
store of value in an increasingly inflationary world. (Remember double-
digit inflation?) When the Japanese stock market soared in the 1980s,
with price/earnings ratios often five to ten times as high as corresponding
levels for U.S. companies, the bulls were ready with a reassuring expla-
nation: The Japanese stock market is different because companies hold
large blocks of one another's shares, and they rarely sell these holdings.
As this book was being written, there was an explosive rally in tech-
nology stocks, particularly Internet issues. Stocks with no earnings, or
even a glimmer of the prospect of earnings, were being bid up to incredi-
ble levels. Once again, there was no shortage of pundits to explain why
this time was different; why earnings were no longer important (at least
for these companies). Warnings about the aspects of mania in the cur-
rent market were mentioned by a number of the traders interviewed. By
the time this manuscript was submitted, many of the Internet stocks had
already witnessed enormous percentage declines. The message, however,
remains relevant because there will always be some market or sector that
rekindles the cry, "This time is different." Just remember: It never is.
26. Fundamentals Are Not Bullish or Bearish in a Vacuum; They Are
Bullish or Bearish Only Relative to Price
A great company could be a terrible investment if its price rise has
already more than discounted the bullish fundamentals. Conversely, a
company that has been experiencing problems and is the subject of neg-
ative news could be a great investment if its price decline has more than
discounted the bearish information.
In his interview, Lauer provided a number of excellent examples of
this principle, among them Microsoft, an outstanding company in many
respects, but one he considered a very poor investment. In Lauer's
words, "This business is not about investing in great companies, it's about
profiting from inefficiently priced stocks." When asked for her advice to
investors, Galante expressed a similar sentiment: "A good company could
be a bad stock and vice versa."
27. Successful Investing and Trading Mas Nothing to Do with Forecasting
Lescarbeau, for example, emphasized that he never made any predic-
tions and scoffed at those who claimed to have such abilities. When
asked why he laughed when the subject of market forecasting came up,
he replied: "I'm laughing about the people who do make predictions
about the stock market. They don't know. Nobody knows."
Lauer contrasted the distinction between forecasting and the analysis
of known information: "Any investment approach that is heavily reliant
on accurate forecasting . . . is inherently risky. . . . All that is required for
successful investing is the commonsense analysis of today's facts and the
courage to act on your convictions."


--- PAGE 164 ---
W I Z A R D 
L E S S O N S *
28. Never Assume a Market Fact Based on What You Read or What Others
Say; Verify Everything Yourself
When Cook first inquired about the interpretation of the tick (the num-
ber of New York Stock Exchange stocks whose last trade was an uptick,
minus the number whose last trade was a downtick), he was told by an
experienced broker that if the tick was very high, it was a buy signal. By
doing his own research and recording his own observations, he discov-
ered that the truth was exactly the opposite.
Bender began his option trading career by questioning the very core
premises underlying the option pricing models used throughout the
industry. Convinced that the conventional wisdom was wrong, he devel-
oped a methodology that was actually based on betting against the impli-
cations of the option pricing models in wide use.
29. Never, Ever Listen to Other Opinions
To succeed in the markets, it is essential to make your own decisions.
Numerous traders cited listening to others as their worst blunder. Walton
and Minervini lost their entire investment stake because of this misjudg-
ment. Talking about this experience, Minervini said, "My mistake had
been surrendering the decision-making responsibility to someone else."
Watson got off cheap, learning this lesson at the bargain basement price
of a blown grade on a class project. Cohen talks about someone he knows
who has the skill to be a great trader but will never be one because "he
refuses to make his own decisions."
30. Beware of Ego
Walton warns, "The odd thing about this industry is that no matter how
successful you become, if you let )'our ego get involved, one bad phone
call can put you out of business."
51. The Need for Self-Awareness
Each trader must be aware of personal weaknesses that may impede
trading success and make the appropriate adjustments. For example,
Walton ultimately realized his weakness was listening to other people's
opinions. His awareness of this personal flaw compelled him to make
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
sure that he worked alone, even when the level of assets under manage-
ment would have seemed to dictate the need for a staff. In addition, to
safely vent his tip-following, gambling urges, he set aside a small
amount of capital—too small to do any damage—to be used for such
trades.
Doctor Kiev describes his work with traders as "a dialogue process to
find out what [personal flaws are] impeding a person's performance."
Some examples of these personal flaws he helped traders identify
included:
*• a trader whose bargain-hunting predisposition caused him to miss
many good trades because he was always trying to get a slightly better
entry price;
> a trader whose scaled-down entry approach was in conflict with his
experiencing these trades as a loss, even though they were entered in
accordance with his plan;
*• a trader who, to his detriment, always kept a partial position after he
made the decision to get out because of his anxiety that the stock
would go higher after he liquidated.
Awareness alone is not enough; a trader must also be willing to make
the necessary changes. Cook, who also works with traders, has seen peo-
ple with good trading skills fail because they wouldn't deal with their per-
sonal weaknesses. One example he offered was a client who was
addicted to the excitement of trading on expiration Fridays. Although the
trader did well across all other market sessions, these far more numerous
small gains were more than swamped by his large losses on the four-per-
year expiration Fridays. Despite being made aware of his weakness, the
trader refused to change and ultimately wiped out.
32. Don't Get Emotionally Involved
Ironically, although many people are drawn to the markets for excite-
ment, the Market Wizards frequently cite keeping emotion out of trad-
ing as essential advice to investors. Watson says, "You have to invest
without emotions. If you let emotions get involved, you will make bad
decisions."


--- PAGE 165 ---
33. View Personal Problems As a Major Cautionary Flag to Your Trading
Health problems or emotional stress can sometimes decimate a trader's
performance. For example, all of Cook's losing periods (after he became a
consistent winning trader) coincided with times of personal difficulties
(e.g., a painful injury, his father's heart attack). It is a sign of Walton's
maturity as a trader that he decided to take a trading hiatus when an
impending divorce coincided with a rare losing period. The morale is: Be
extremely vigilant to signs of deteriorating trading performance if you are
experiencing health problems or other personal difficulties. During such
times, it is probably a good idea to cut trading size and to be prepared to
stop trading altogether at the first sign of trouble.
34. Analyze Your Past Trades for Possible Insights
Analyzing your past trades might reveal patterns that could be used to
improve future performance. For example, in analyzing his past trades,
Minervini found that his returns would have been substantially higher if
he had capped his losses to a fixed maximum level. This discovery
prompted a change in his trading rules that dramatically improved his
performance.
35. Don't Worry About Looking Stupid
Never let your market decisions be restricted or influenced by concern
over what others might think. As a perfect example of the danger of wor-
rying about other people's opinions, early in his career, Minervini held on
to many losing positions long after he decided they should be liquidated
because of concern about being teased by his broker.
36. The Danger of Leverage
Lauer learned his lesson about leverage during the October 1987 crash.
The problem was not the crash or his stock selection methodology, as his
portfolio recovered in due time, but rather his use of leverage, which
resulted in a margin call, forcing premature liquidation of his positions.
Therefore Lauer's use of leverage (full margin) didn't merely double his
loss on the initial decline, but more importantly prevented him from par-
ticipating in the subsequent recovery.
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
Ironically, even though Mark Cook won on most of his trades in his
initial market endeavor, he wiped out because of excessive leverage. If
you are too heavily leveraged, all it takes is one mistake to knock you out
of the game.
37. The Importance of Position Size
Superior performance requires not only picking the right stock, but also
having the conviction to implement major potential trades in meaningful
size. Doctor Kiev, who sees Cohen's trading statistics, said that nearly
100 percent of Cohen's very substantial gains come from 5 percent of his
trades. Cohen himself estimates that perhaps only about 55 percent of
his trades are winners. Implicit in these statements is that when Cohen
bets big, he is usually right. Indeed, his uncanny skill in determining
which trades warrant stepping on the accelerator is an essential element
in his success.
Lauer makes a similar point when he says, "I tell my guys that if we
come up with a good idea, and as a firm we only buy 50,000 or 100,000
shares instead of a million plus, then that trade is a mistake." As another
example, even though Lescarbeau is a systematic trader, he will occa-
sionally increase the leverage on trades that he perceives have a particu-
larly high likelihood of winning. Interestingly, he has never lost money on
any one of these trades.
The point is that all trades are not the same. Trades that are perceived
to have particularly favorable potential relative to risk or a particularly
high probability of success should be implemented in a larger size than
other trades. Of course, what constitutes "larger size" is relative to each
individual, but the concept is as applicable to the trader whose average
position size is one hundred shares as it is to the fund manager whose
average position size is one million shares.
38. Complexity Is Not a Necessary Ingredient for Success
Guazzoni's initial strategy when he formed his own fund was based on a
very simple idea—buying restricted shares at a deep discount. Although
the idea was very simple, it achieved the magic combination of high
return and very low risk that has eluded far more complex approaches.


--- PAGE 166 ---
wrz A-RISKS sons
39. View Trading As a Vocation, Not a Hobby
As both Cook and Minervini said, "Hobbies cost money." Walton offered
similar advice, "Either go at it full force, or don't go at it at all. Don't
dabble."
40. Trading, Like Any Other Business Endeavor, Requires a Sound
Business Plan
Cook advises that every trader should develop a business plan that
answers all the following essential questions:
> What markets will be traded?
> What is the capitalization?
> How will orders be entered?
> What type of drawdown will cause trading cessation and reevalua-
tion?
O- What are the profit goals?
> What procedure will be used for analyzing trades?
> How will trading procedures change if personal problems arise?
> How will the working environment be set up?
> What rewards will the trader take for successful trading?
> What will the trader do to continue to improve market skills?
41. Define High-Probability Trades
Although the methodologies of the traders interviewed differ greatly, in
their own style, they have all found ways of identifying high-probability
trades.
42. Find Low-Risk Opportunities
Many of the traders interviewed have developed methods that focus on
identifying low-risk trades. Guazzoni says, "Every period of time has its
own opportunities where you can find investments that are extremely
discounted and have a very well protected downside."
43. Be Sure You Have a Good Reason for Any Trade You Make
As Cohen explains, buying a stock because it is "too low" or selling it
because it is "too high" is not a good reason. Watson paraphrases Peter
W I Z A R D LESSORS
Lynch's principle that if you can't summarize the reasons why you own a
stock in four sentences, you probably shouldn't own it.
44. Use Common Sense in Investing
Taking a cue from his role model, Peter Lynch, Watson is a strong propo-
nent of commonsense research. As he illustrated through numerous
examples, the most important research one can often do is simply trying
a company's product or visiting its mall outlets in the case of retailers.
45. Buy Stocks That Are Difficult to Buy
Walton says, "One of the things I like to see when I'm trying to buy stocks
is that they become very difficult to buy. I put an order in to buy Dell at
42, and I got a fill back at 45. I love that." Minervini says, "Stocks that are
ready to blast off are usually very difficult to buy without pushing the mar-
ket higher." He says that one of the mistakes "less skilled traders" make is
"waitfing] to buy these stocks on a pullback, which never comes."
46. Don't Let a Prior Lower-Priced Liquidation Keep You from Purchasing a
Stock That You Would Have Bought Otherwise
Walton considers his willingness to buy back good stocks, even when
they are trading higher than where he got out, as one of the changes that
helped him succeed as a trader. Minervini stresses the need for having a
plan to get back into a trade if you're stopped out. "Otherwise," he says,
"you'll often find yourself . . . watching the position go up 50 percent or
100 percent while you're on the sidelines."
47. Holding on to a Losing Stock Can Be a Mistake, Even If It Bounces
Back, If the Money Could Have Been Utilized More Effectively
Elsewhere
When a stock is down a lot from where it was purchased, it is very easy
for the investor to rationalize, "How can I get out now? I can't lose much
more anyway." Even if this is true, this type of thinking can keep money
tied up in stocks that are going nowhere, causing the trader to miss other
opportunities. Talking about why he dumped some stocks after their
prices had already declined as much as 70 percent from where he got in,


--- PAGE 167 ---
W I Z A R D 
L E S S O N S ?
Walton said: "By cleaning out my portfolio and reinvesting in solid
stocks, I made back much more money than I would have if I had kept
[these] stocks and waited for a dead cat bounce."
48. You Don't Have to Make AU-or-Nothing Trading Decisions
As an illustration of this advice offered by Minervini, if you can't decide
whether to take profits on a position, there's nothing wrong with taking
profits on part of it.
49. Pay Attention to How a Stock Responds to News
Walton looks for stocks that move higher on good news but don't give
much ground on negative news. If a stock responds poorly to negative
news, then in Walton's words "[it] hasn't been blessed [by the market]."
50. Insider Buying Is an Important Confirming Condition
The willingness of management or the company to buy its own stock may
not be a sufficient condition to buy a stock, but it does provide strong
confirmation that the stock is a good investment. A number of traders
cited insider buying as a critical element in their stock selection process:
Lauer, Okumus, and Watson, to name a few.
Okumus stresses that insider buying statistics need to be viewed in
relative terms. "I compare the amount of stock someone buys with his
net worth and salary. For example, if the amount he buys is more than his
annual salary, I consider that significant." Okumus also points out the
necessity of making sure that insider buying actually represents the pur-
chase of new shares, not the exercise of options.
51. Monitor Major Fund Holdings
Lauer explained that the major funds hold such large positions that it will
often take months for them to liquidate or significantly reduce the port-
folio allocation to a specific stock. Moreover, he points out that there is a
substantial overlap in the largest holdings of major mutual funds. These
considerations suggest that if fund-holding statistics show that the major
funds are beginning to reduce their exposure in a particular stock, it
should be viewed as a clue that the given stock is likely to underperform
in coming months.
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
52. Hope Is a Four-Letter Word
Cook advises that if you ever find yourself saying, "I hope this position
comes back," get out or reduce your size.
53. The Argument Against Diversification
Diversification is often extolled as a virtue because it is an instrumental
tool in reducing risk. This argument is valid insofar as it is generally
unwise to risk all your assets on one or two equities, as opposed to
spreading the investment across a broader number of diversified stocks.
Beyond a certain minimum level, however, diversification may some-
times have negative consequences.
Lauer makes two arguments against diversification. First, if carried
far enough, it will guarantee indexlike performance. Therefore, if a
trader's goal is to significantly surpass index performance, then diversifi-
cation should be limited. Second, Lauer points out that in order to be
able to make money in both up and down markets, it is necessary for a
trader to decouple his performance from the index, which again means
limiting the number of stocks held. Okumus, another antidiversification
proponent, explains as follows why he limits his portfolio to approxi-
mately ten holdings: "Simple logic: My top ten ideas will always perform
better than my top hundred."
The foregoing is not intended as an argument against diversification.
Indeed, some minimal diversification is almost always desirable. The
point is that although some diversification is beneficial, more diversifica-
tion may sometimes be detrimental. Each trader needs to consider the
appropriate level of diversification as an individual decision.
54. Caution Against Data Mining
If enough data is tested, patterns will arise simply by chance—even in
random data. Data mining—letting the computer cycle through data,
testing thousands or millions of input combinations in search of prof-
itable patterns—will tend to generate trading models (systems) that look
great but have no predictive power. Such hindsight analysis can entice
the researcher to trade a worthless system. Shaw avoids this trap by first
developing a hypothesis of market behavior to be tested rather than
blindly searching the data for patterns.


--- PAGE 168 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
55. Synergy and Marginal Indicators
Shaw mentioned that although the individual market inefficiencies his
firm has identified cannot be traded profitably on their own, they can be
combined to identify profit opportunities. The general implication is that
it is possible for technical or fundamental indicators that are marginal on
their own to provide the basis for a much more reliable indicator when
combined.
56. Past Superior Performance Is Only Relevant If the Same Conditions Are
Expected to Prevail
It is important to understand why an investment (stock or fund) outper-
formed in the past. For example, as Lauer pointed out, in the late 1990s
a number of the better performing funds owed their superior results to a
strategy of buying the most highly capitalized stocks. As a result, the
high-cap stocks were bid up to extremely high price/earnings ratios rela-
tive to the rest of the market. A new investor expecting these funds to
continue to outperform in the future would, in effect, be making an
investment bet that was dependent on high-cap stocks becoming even
more overpriced relative to the rest of the market.
As commentator George J. Church once wrote, "Every generation has
its characteristic folly, but the basic cause is the same: people persist in
believing that what has happened in the recent past will go on happening
into the indefinite future, even while the ground is shifting under their
feet."
57. Popularity Can Destroy a Sound Approach
A classic example of this principle was provided by the 1980s experience
with portfolio insurance (the systematic sale of stock index futures as the
value of a stock portfolio declines in order to reduce risk exposure). In
the early years of its implementation, portfolio insurance provided a rea-
sonable strategy for investors to limit losses in the event of market
declines. As the strategy became more popular, however, it set the stage
for its own destruction. By the time of the October 1987 crash, portfolio
insurance was in wide usage, which contributed to the domino effect of
price declines triggering portfolio insurance selling, which pushed prices
still lower, causing more portfolio selling, and so on. It can even be
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
argued that the mere knowledge of the existence of large portfolio insur-
ance sell orders below the market was one of the reasons for the enor-
mous magnitude of the October 19, 1987, decline.
Index funds may well provide a current example of this principle. As
Lauer explained, index funds originally made a lot of sense for the
investor, providing the opportunity to own a representative piece of the
market, with presumably lower risk due to the index's diversification, and
a low cost structure and favorable tax treatment (due to low turnover). As
index funds outperformed the majority of actively managed funds, how-
ever, they attracted steadily expanding investment flows. This investment
shift, in turn, created more buying for the stocks in the index at the
expense of the rest of the market, which helped the index funds outper-
form the vast majority of individual stocks, attracting still more assets,
and so on. As a result of this process, what started out as a conservative
investment has evolved into an investment concentrated in issues trading
at high valuations and therefore embedding above-average risk.
Of course, it is impossible to know whether this situation will correct
itself by the time this book is published. But if index stocks are still trad-
ing at historically high price/earnings ratios relative to the rest of the mar-
ket at that time, then the same cautionary message would apply.
58. Like a Coin, the Market Has Two Sides—but the Coin Is Unfair
Just as you can bet heads or tails on a coin, you can go long or short a
stock. Unlike a normal coin, however, the odds for each side are not
equal: The long-term uptrend in stock prices results in a strong negative
bias in short-selling trades. As Lescarbeau says, "Shorting stocks is dumb
because the odds are stacked against you. The stock market has been ris-
ing by over 10 percent a year for many decades. Why would you want to
go against that trend?" (Actually, there is a good reason why, which we will
get to shortly.)
Another disadvantage to the short side is that the upside is capped.
Whereas a well-chosen buy could result in hundreds or even thousands
of percent profit on the trade, the most perfect short position is limited to
a profit of 100 percent (if the stock goes to zero). Conversely, whereas a
long position can't lose more than 100 percent (assuming no use of mar-
gin), the loss on a short position is theoretically unlimited.


--- PAGE 169 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
Finally, with the exception of index products, the system is stacked
against short selling. The short seller has to borrow the stock to sell it,
an action that introduces the risk of the borrowed stock being called in
at a future date, forcing the trader to cover (buy in) the position. Fre-
quently, deliberate attempts to force shorts to cover their positions
(short squeezes) can cause overvalued, and even worthless, stocks to
rally sharply before collapsing. Thus, the short seller faces the real risk
of being right on the trade and still losing money because of an artifi-
cially forced liquidation. Another obstacle faced by shorts is that posi-
tions can be implemented only on an uptick (when the stock trades up
from its last sale price)—a rule that can cause a trade to be executed at
a much worse price that the prevailing market price when the order was
entered.
59. The Why of Short Selling
With all the disadvantages of short selling, it would appear reasonable to
conclude that it is foolhardy to ever go short. Reasonable, but wrong. As
proof, consider this amazing fact: thirteen of the fourteen traders inter-
viewed in this book incorporate short selling! (The only exception is
Lescarbeau.) Obviously, there must be some very compelling reason for
short selling.
The key to understanding the raison d'etre for short selling is to view
these trades within the context of the total portfolio rather than as stand-
alone transactions. With all their inherent disadvantages, short positions
have one powerful attribute: they are inversely correlated to the rest of
the portfolio (they will tend to make money when long holdings are los-
ing and vice versa). This property makes short selling one of the most
useful tools for reducing risk.
To understand how short selling can reduce risk, we will compare two
hypothetical portfolios. Portfolio A holds only long positions and makes
20 percent for the year. Portfolio B makes all the same trades as Portfolio
A, but also adds a smaller component of short trades. To keep the exam-
ple simple, assume the short positions in Portfolio B exactly break even
for the year. Based on the stated assumptions, Portfolio B will also make
20 percent for the year. There is, however, one critical difference: the
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
magnitude of equity declines will tend to be smaller in Portfolio B. Why?
Because the short positions in the portfolio will tend to do best when the
rest of the portfolio is declining.
In our example, we assumed short positions broke even. If a trader
can make a net profit on short positions, then short selling offers the
opportunity to both reduce risk and increase return. Actually, short sell-
ing offers the opportunity to increase returns without increasing risk,
even if the short positions themselves only break even. * How? By trading
long positions with greater leverage (using margin if the trader is fully
invested)—a step that can be taken without increasing risk because the
short positions are a hedge against the rest of the portfolio.
It should now be clear why so many of the traders interviewed sup-
plement their long positions with short trades: It allows them to increase
their return/risk levels (lower risk, or higher return, or some combination
of the two).
If short selling can help reduce portfolio risk, why is it so often
considered to be exactly the opposite: a high-risk endeavor? Two rea-
sons. First, short trades are often naively viewed as independent trans-
actions rather than seen in the context of the total portfolio. Second,
the open-ended loss exposure of short positions can indeed lead to
enormous risk. Fortunately, however, this risk can be controlled, which
brings us to our next point.
60. The One Indispensable Rule for Short Selling
Although short selling will tend to reduce portfolio risk, any individual
short position is subject to losses far beyond the original capital commit-
ment. A few examples:
>• A $10,000 short position in Amazon in June 1998 would have lost
$120,000 in seven months.
*• A $10,000 short position in Ebay in October 1998 would have lost
$230,000 in seven months.
*• A $ 10,000 short position in Yahoo in January 1997 would have lost
$680,000 in two years.
*To be precise, this statement would be true even for small net losses in the short compo-
nent of the portfolio, but an adequate explanation is beyond the scope of this book.


--- PAGE 170 ---
W1ZAW L E S S O N S
As these examples make clear, it takes only one bad mistake to wipe
out an account on the short side. Because of the theoretically unlimited
risk in short positions, the one essential rule for short selling is: Define a
specific plan for limiting losses and rigorously adhere to it.
The following are some of the risk-control methods for short positions
mentioned by the interviewed traders:
> A short position is liquidated when it reaches a predetermined
maximum loss point, even if the trader's bearish analysis is completely
unchanged. As Watson says, "I will cover even if I am convinced
that the company will ultimately go bankrupt. . . . I'm not going to
let [a one-percent short in the portfolio] turn into a 5 percent loss."
> A short position is limited to a specific maximum percentage of the
portfolio. Therefore, as the price of a short position rises, the size of
the position would have to be reduced to keep its percentage share of
the portfolio from increasing.
>• Short positions are treated as short-term trades, often tied to a spe-
cific catalyst, such as an earnings report. Win or lose, the trade is
liquidated within weeks or even days. For example, Lauer will typi-
cally hold long positions for six to twelve months, or even longer,
but he will usually be out of short positions within a couple of
weeks or less.
61. Identifying Short-Selling Candidates (or Stocks to Avoid for Long-Only
Traders)
Galante, whose total focus is on short selling, looks for the following red
flags in finding potential shorts:
> high receivables (large outstanding billings for goods and services);
> change in accountants;
> high turnover in chief financial officers;
>• a company blaming short sellers for their stock's decline;
*• a company completely changing their core business to take advan-
tage of a prevailing hot trend.
The stocks flagged must meet three additional conditions to qualify
for an actual short sale:
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S
>• very high P/E ratio;
> a catalyst that will make the stock vulnerable over the near term;
> an uptrend that has stalled or reversed.
Watson's ideal short-selling candidate is a high-priced, one product
company. He looks for companies whose future sales will be vulnerable
because their single or primary product does not live up to promotional
claims or because there is no barrier to entry for competitors.
62. Use Options to Express Specific Price Expectations
Prevailing option prices will reflect the assumption that price movements
are random. If you have specific expectations about the relative probabil-
ities of a stock's future price movements, then it will frequently be possi-
ble to define option trades that offer a higher profit potential (at an
equivalent risk level) than buying the stock.
63. Sell Out-of-the-Money Puts in Stocks You Want to Buy
This is a technique used by Okumus that could be very useful to many
investors but is probably utilized by very few. The idea is for an investor
to sell puts at a strike price at which he would want to buy the stock any-
way. This strategy will assure making some profit if the stock fails to
decline to the intended buying point and will reduce the cost for the
stock by the option premium received if it does reach the intended pur-
chase price.
For example, let's say XYZ Corporation is trading at $24 and you want
to buy the stock at $20. Typically, to achieve this investment goal, you
would place a buy order for the stock at a price limit of $20. The alterna-
tive Okumus suggests is selling $20 puts in the stock. In this way, if the
stock fails to decline to your buy price, you will at least make some
money from the sale of the $20 puts, which by definition will expire
worthless. If, on the other hand, the stock declines to under $20, put
buyers will exercise their option and you will end up long the stock at
$20, which is the price that you wanted to buy it at anyway. Moreover, in
this latter event, your purchase price will be reduced by the premium
collected from the sale of the options.


--- PAGE 171 ---
W I Z A R D L E S S O N S '
64. Wall Street Research Reports Will Tend to Be Biased
A number of traders mentioned the tendency for Wall Street research
reports to be biased. Watson suggests the bias is a result of investment
banking relationships—analysts will typically feel implicit pressure to
issue buy ratings on companies that are clients of the firm, even if they
don't particularly like the stock. Lauer, who was himself an analyst for
many years, pointed out the pressure on analysts to issue recommenda-
tions that are easily saleable (popular, ultra liquid stocks), not necessarily
those with the best return/risk prospects.
65. The Universality of Success
This chapter was intended to summarize the elements of successful trad-
ing and investing. I believe, however, that the same traits that lead to suc-
cess in trading are also instrumental to success in any field. Virtually all
the items listed, with the exception of those that are exclusively market
specific, would be pertinent as a blueprint for success in any endeavor.
APPENDIX
Options—Understanding
the Basics
There are two basic types of options: calls and puts. The purchase of a call
option provides the buyer with the right—but not the obligation—to pur-
chase the underlying stock (or other financial instrument) at a specified
price, called the strike price or exercise price, at any time up to and
including the expiration date. A put option provides the buyer with the
right—but not the obligation—to sell the underlying stock at the strike
price at any time prior to expiration. (Note, therefore, that buying a put is
a bearish trade, whereas selling a put is a bullish trade.) The price of an
option is called premium. As an example of an option, an IBM April 130
call gives the purchaser the right to buy 100 shares of IBM at $130 per
share at any time during the life of the option.
The buyer of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated price rise by
locking in a specified purchase price. The call buyer's maximum possible
loss will be equal to the dollar amount of the premium paid for the
option. This maximum loss would occur on an option held until expira-
tion if the strike price were above the prevailing market price. For exam-
ple, if IBM were trading at $ 125 when the 130 option expired, the option
would expire worthless. If at expiration the price of the underlying mar-
ket was above the strike price, the option would have some value and
would hence be exercised. However, if the differenct between the mar-
ket price and the strike price was less than the premium paid for the
option, the net result of the trade would still be a loss. In order for a call
buyer to realize a net profit, the difference between the market price and
Adapted from Jack D. Schwager, A Complete Guide to the Futures Market (New York:
John Wiley, 1984). Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
327


--- PAGE 172 ---
A P P E N D I X
the strike price would have to exceed the premium paid when the call
was purchased (after adjusting tor commission cost). The higher the
market price, the greater the resulting profit.
The buyer of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated price decline by
locking in a sales price. Like the call buyer, his maximum possible loss is
limited to the dollar amount of the premium paid for the option. In the
case of a put held until expiration, the trade would show a net profit if
the strike price exceeded the market price by an amount greater than the
premium of the put at purchase (after adjusting for commission cost).
Whereas the buyer of a call or put has limited risk and unlimited poten-
tial gain, the reverse is true for the seller. The option seller (often called the
writer) receives the dollar value of the premium in return for undertaking
the obligation to assume an opposite position at the strike price if an option
is exercised. For example, if a call is exercised, the seller must assume a
short position in the underlying market at the strike price (because, by
exercising the call, the buyer assumes a long position at that price).
The seller of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated sideways to
modestly declining market. In such a situation, the premium earned by
selling a call provides the most attractive trading opportunity. However, if
the trader expected a large price decline, he would be usually better off
going short the underlying market or buying a put—trades with open-
ended profit potential. In a similar fashion, the seller of a put seeks to
profit from an anticipated sideways to modestly rising market.
Some novices have trouble understanding why a trader would not
always prefer the buy side of the option (call or put, depending on market
opinion), since such a trade has unlimited potential and limited risk.
Such confusion reflects the failure to take probability into account.
Although the option seller's theoretical risk is unlimited, the price levels
that have the greatest probability of occurrence, (i.e., prices in the vicin-
ity of the market price when the option trade occurs) would result in a
net gain to the option seller. Roughly speaking, the option buyer accepts
a large probability of a small loss in return for a small probability of a
large gain, whereas the option seller accepts a small probability of a large
loss in exchange for a large probability of a small gain. In an efficient
market, neither the consistent option buyer nor the consistent option
seller should have any significant advantage over the long run.
O P T I O N S — UNDtiSWNDING THE BASICS
The option premium consists of two components: intrinsic value plus
time value. The intrinsic value of a call option is the amount by which the
current market price is above the strike price. (The intrinsic value of a
put option is the amount by which the current market price is below the
strike price.) In effect, the intrinsic value is that part of the premium that
coulcl be realized if the option were exercised at the current market price.
The intrinsic value serves as a floor price for an option. Why? Because if
the premium were less than the intrinsic value, a trader could buy and
exercise the option and immediately offset the resulting market: position,
thereby realizing a net gain (assuming that the trader covers at least
transaction costs).
Options that have intrinsic value (i.e., calls with strike prices below
the market price and puts with strike prices above the market price) are
said to be in the money. Options that have no intrinsic value are called
out of the money options. Options with a strike price closest to the market
price are called al (he -money options.
An out of the money option, which by definition has an intrinsic value
equal to zero, will still have some value because of the possibility that the
market price will move beyond the strike price prior to the expiration
date. An in the money option will have a value greater than the intrinsic
value because a position in the option will be preferred to a position in
the underlying market. Why? Because both the option and the market
position will gain equally in the event of a favorable price movement, but
the option's maximum loss is limited. The portion of the premium that
exceeds the intrinsic value is called the time value.
The three most important factors that influence an option's time
value are the following:
1. Relationship between the strike price and market price. Deeply out of
the money options will have little time value, since it is unlikely that
the market price will move to the strike price—or beyond—prior to
expiration. Deeply in the money options have little time value
because these options offer positions very similar to the underlying
market—both will gain and lose equivalent amounts for all but an
extremely adverse price move. In other words, for a deeply in the
money option, risk being limited is not worth very much because the
strike price is so tar from the prevailing market place.


--- PAGE 173 ---
Time remaining until expiration. The more time remaining until expi-
ration, the greater the value of the option. This is true because a
longer life span increases the probability of the intrinsic value
increasing by any specified amount prior to expiration.
Volatility. Time value will vary directly with the estimated volatility (a
measure of the degree of price variability) of the underlying market
for the remaining life span of the option. This relationship results
because greater volatility raises the probability of the intrinsic value
increasing by any specified amount prior to expiration. In other
words, the greater the volatility, the greater the probable price range
of the market.
Although volatility is an extremely important factor in the determi-
nation of option premium values, it should be stressed that the future
volatility of a market is never precisely known until after the fact. (In
contrast, the time remaining until expiration and the relationship
between the current market price and the strike price can be exactly
specified at any juncture.) Thus, volatility must always be estimated
on the basis of historical volatility data. The future volatility estimate
implied by market prices (i.e., option premiums), which may be
higher or lower than the historical volatility, is called the implied
volatility.
INDEX
accounting, 84, 89, 91, 94, 324
acquisition finance, 250-52, 253
Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), 262
AIDS drugs, 1 74
Amazon.com, 150-52, 272-73, 323
America Online (AOL), 43-44, 235, 259
Amerigon, 62
arbitrage, 132-33, 255-56, 267, 284
ARPAnet, 262
Asian financial crisis, 18
assets:
growth of, 23-24, 207, 312-13
liquidation of, ]65
return of, ], 31
transfer of, 189
value of, 41, 63, 248-49, 253
audits, 84,91
Balance Bars, 66
balance sheets, 42, 51, 85, 268
Bankers Trust, 57, 58
banking, 141, 243-44, 249
bankruptcy, 12-14, 24, 105-6, 122, 139, 145-46,
163
Bannister, Roger, 291
Bear Stearns, 127, 131, 135-36, 138, 142
Beat the Dealer (Thorpe), 266
Beat the Market (Thorpe), 266
Bender, John, 221-38
background of, 221-25
fund managed by, 221, 222
losses of, 225
as novice trader, 225-27
profits of, 221-22, 234
strategy of, 221, 226-38, 303, 304, 306, 312
Bezos, Jeff, 272-73
bid/ask differentials, 134-35
Black & Decker, 62-63
blackjack, 266-67
Black-Scholes model, 221, 227-34
Blake, Gil, 189, 197-98
Bloomberg financial services, 57, 59
Bombay (clothing store), 67-68
bonds:
convertible, 257
government, 8, 247-48
illiquid, 7, 8, 25
interest rates and, 9, 24, 67, 105, 133-34, 135,
269, 277
junk, 82
market for, 9-10, 1 10-1 1, 144-45, 285, 309
price of, 7-8, 110-11, 144-45, 285
book value, 44, 149, 150, 165, 167
Brandywine Fund, 58-59
brokerage firms, 55-56, 61-62
Buffett, Warren, 40, 42, 157
business plans, 68-69, 91, 94, 1 18, 122, 316,
324
Business Week, \27n
Canada, 1-6, 9-10, 36
capital:
appreciation of, 23
loss of, 68
preservation of, 44, 141, 217
venture, 10, 205, 207, 222, 303
capitalization:
large, 34, 43-44, 150, 198-99, 320
medium, 58
revenue vs., 36-37, 45, 52
small, 24, 47, 57, 58, 59, 68, 69, 78, 198-99,
281
for trading, 10, 114-19, 120, 142, 146, 147,205,
207, 222, 303
cash flow, 43, 44, 45, 51, 149, 248
catalysts, 44-46, 52, 60, 61, 62-63, 89, 94, 114,
215-17,220, 279-81, 307, 325
central processing unit (CPU), 261
certificates, stock, 69-70
chart patterns, 181-84
331


--- PAGE 174 ---
chief executive officers (CEOs), 49, 91, 241, 244-45,
250
chief financial officers (CFOs), 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 64,
67, 71, 72,94, 142, 324
Church, George J., 320
Cisco, 22
Cities Service, 103-7, 108, 109
Claire's, 68
classic arbitrage, 255, 267
Clinton, Bill, 259
Close Encounters of the Third Kind, 100
CNBC, 236
Coakley, Ted, III, 149
Cohen, Steve, 275-87
background of, 278-79
fund managed by, 275, 288, 290-93
losses of, 279-81,286-87
profits of, 275
strategy of, 275-87, 298, 300, 301, 305, 306, 308,
309, 312, 315,316
cold-calling, 12, 56,212-13
Columbia Pictures, 100
commissions, 48, 134, 148, 175, 203, 213, 214,
328
Commodities Corporation, 191
commodity markets, 199,231
commodity trading advisors (CTAs), 231
Commodore Computer, 13-14
Compaq, 37
competition, 73, 145, 229
compilers, 258
Complete Guide to the Futures Market, A (Schwager),
327n
compliance departments, 11 1—13
Comp USA, 90
computers:
market for, 37-38, 39, 43-44, 86-88, 90, 139, 244,
269,279-80
parallel-processor, 258-63
research based on, 77, 81, 129-30, 157-58, 181,
194-95, 197, 202-3, 204, 208, 215, 255, 274,
319
software for, 26, 86-88, 90, 139, 215
see also Internet
confirmation statements, 16
conjunction trades, 109
consolidates, 24M4
contingency plans, 184, 186, 187
Cook, Mark D., 95-126
background of, 95-97
fund managed by, 97
losses of, 101-7, 108, 122-24, 126, 314
as novice trader, 97-107
profits of, 96, 97-98, 101, 112-19, 125
strategy of, 97, 107-26, 299, 301, 303, 304, 305,
308,312,314,315,316,319
Cook, Martha, 104-5, 123-24
Cook, Marvin, 95, 96, 123-24, 126
Cook, Terri, 97, 99, 106
Cramer's commentary, 218
Cray, Seymour, 261-62
currency trading, 5, 9, 202-3
Cyrus J. Lawrence, 32
Daily Graphs, 158
Daley, Richard, 98, 100
data mining, 319
debt, 43, 45
default rate, 82
Dell, 19,39-41
D. E. Shaw, 251, 255, 257-58, 259, 272, 273,
304
D. E. Shaw Financial Products, 259
DESoFT, 259
diagnostic capability, 29
discounts, 140-41, 157,213,250-52,253,315
Disney, 93-94
diversification, 33, 34, 51, 86-87, 93, 306, 319,
321
dividend capture strategy, 140-41
dividends, 13, 133, 140-41
dog races, 129-30
Dow Jones Industrial Average, 47, 109
Dutch tulip craze, 64
earnings:
expectations of, 15, 16, 40-41, 49, 61, 63, 86-88,
138-39, 141,215-17,279,286-87
loss of, 81,89-90, 92,94, 138-39, 215-17,
279
price vs., 21, 22, 43-44, 52, 58, 59, 60, 62, 65, 66,
72-73, 79, 81, 89, 92, 94, 149, 152, 154-55,
158, 164, 165, 166-67, 172,216,306,320,321,
325
quarterly reports of, 40, 60, 62-63, 84, 138-39,
141,215-17,286-87
"earnings surprise," 216
Eastman Kodak, 192, 199
eBay, 323
Education Department, U.S., 91-92
Einstein, Albert, 236
Elsie the Cow, 98-100
Enamalon, 68
enhanced index funds, 34-36
equity trading, 6, 144-45, 257
FarSight, 259
Federal Reserve Bank, 271, 277
fees, 35, 55, 275
Fidelity Magellan, 34-36, 38-39, 43, 67
financial statements, xiii, 57, 185, 255
Fletcher, Alphonse "Buddy," Jr., 127-47
background of, 129—31
as black, 127-28, 136-38
I N D E X
funds managed by, 128-29, 138, 142-47
as novice trader, 127-38
profits of, 128-29, 132, 141-42, 147
strategy of, 138-47, 252, 300, 301, 304, 305,
306
Fletcher Asset Management, 128, 138, 142
Fletcher Fund, 129
flexibility, 29, 299-300
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 174
Ford Motors, 62, 145
foreign exchange, 5
Fortune, 127n
Fosback, Norman, 1 56-57
Franklin, Benjamin, 299
fraud, 91-92
Friess Associates, 58-59, 67, 73
front-running, 79-80
futures, 144-45, 191-92, 199, 202-3
see also options
Galante, Dana, 75-94
fund managed by, 76, 85-89, 93
losses of, 86-88
as novice trader, 76, 77-85
profits of, 75-76, 93-94
strategy of, 75-77, 81, 85-94, 311, 324
as woman, 77, 88-89
gambling, 90, 225-26, 255-56, 266-67
Gap, 12,67-68
Gatev, Evan G., 256»i
General Electric, 136, 137
General Motors, 145
Goetzmann, William N., 256n
gold prices, 102, 231-32, 310
Goldwyn, Samuel, 118
"greater fool" premise, 34, 36
Greenberg, Ace, 136, 138
Guazzoni, Claudio, 239-53
background of, 239-40, 245^(6, 247
as novice trader, 246-52
profits of, 239
strategy of, 241-53, 301, 306, 315
Gulf War, 81, 113
head-and-shoulders pattern, 265
hearing aids, 242
hedge funds, 16, 22, 59-60, 61, 80, 81-84, 146-47,
200-202, 207, 295, 306
historical volatility, 330
Hoik, Tim, 191-92
home-equity loans, 12-14, 20
How to Trade in Stocks {Livermore), 176-77
IBM, 37, 131-32, 133, 193, 227, 232, 269, 279, 308,
327
implied volatility, 330
index funds, 34-37, 39, 50, 52, 53, 217-18, 285, 321
Ingram's, 272
initial public offerings (IPOs), 24, 25, 250-52,
279-81
innovation, 147
insider buying, 43,45,51, 60-61, 1 50, 156-57, 160,
163, 165,318
Institutional Investor All-Star analyst team, 32
Intel, 37, 41, 57, 308-9
interest rates, 9, 24, 67, 105, 133-34, 135, 269,
277
Internet, 43-44, 64, 87, 90-91, 92, I 18, 149,
150, 151, 162, 185, 186, 218, 229-30,
240, 249, 259, 262, 279-81,
310-11
inventory, 90, 92
Investing Championship, U.S., I l l , 118, 170
investment:
diversification of, 33, 34, 51, 86-87, 93, 306, 319,
321
institutional, 192,318
long-term, 40, 42, 157, 164, 234-35
return on, 46, 55, 59, 75-76, 97, 170, 243
size of, 32-33, 52
speculation vs., 20, 84-85, 177, 225-26
sea also portfolios
Investor's Business Daily, 152
Istanbul Stock Exchange, 148, 1 53-54, 156
January effect, 198-99
Janus 20, 39-40
Japan, 7-8,64,223,303,310
J, Crew, 10
J. D.Edwards, 157, 159
journal of Portfolio Management, 266
Juno Online Services, 259
Justice Department, U.S., 36
"just-say-no" risk, 244-45
Kidder Peabody, 32, 127-28, 135-38
Kiev, Ari, 285, 288-97, 310, 313, 315
"Knowledge Based Retrieval on a Relational
Database Machine" (Shaw),
258-59
Korea, Republic of (South Korea), 18
Kovner, Bruce, 191
Lancer Offshore, 31, 50
Lauer, Michael, 30-53
as financial analyst, 31-32, 48
fund managed by, 30, 31, 33, 36-37, 51
losses of, 31,42-43, 46
as novice trader, 31-32, 48-49, 50
profits of, 30-31, 50
strategy of, 37-53, 229, 253, 301, 302, 306-7,
308-9, 31 1, 314, 315, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322,
326
LensCrafters, 242


--- PAGE 175 ---
I N D E X
I N D E X
Lescarbeau, Steve, 189-206
background of, 190-91
fund managed by, 189, 200-202
as novice trader, 190-94, 202-3
profits of, 189, 198,201
strategy of, 189, 194-206, 300, 302-3, 304, 311,
315,321
leverage, 47-48, 69-70, 117, 174, 204, 222, 314-15
leveraged buyouts (LBOs), 248-50, 253
Levitt, Jim, 80, 81
Lewis, Michael, 246
Liars Poker (Lewis), 246
Livermore, Jesse, 176-77
Liz Claibornc, 6, 10, 12
Lloyd's Bank, 4-6
Lo, Andrew, 265
lognormal curve, 237n
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), 19—20,
271, 306
Love, Richard, 171
LTXX, 63
Lynch, Peter, 34, 66-67, 157, 161, 316-17
McGuinn, Ed, 59
macroeconomics, 15—16, 18, 26, 81
Magic Faith and Healing: Studies in Primitive
Psychiatry Today (Kiev), 289
Mammis, Justin, 209
management, 25-26, 45,91, 141-42, 150, 156-57,
166,250-52
manufacturers, 65—66
Marcus, Michael, 191
margin calls, 103, 105
market makers, 234, 247^18
market timers, 196
Marlin fund, 207
Masters, Michael, 207-20
background of, 209-14
fund managed by, 207
as novice trader, 209
profits of, 207, 209, 218
strategy of, 211-12, 214-20, 301, 302, 304, 307,
308
Masters, Suzanne, 214
Masters Capital Management, 207
M.B.A.s, 4, 5,31,209
Men's Wearhouse, 68
Meriwether, John, 271
Merrill Lynch, 142,259
Merton, Robert, 271
Microchip Technology, 158
Microsoft, 22, 36-38, 57, 311
Milestone Scientific, 65-66
Minervini, Mark, 169-88
background of, 169-70
 
N
fund managed by, 170
losses of, 171, 173-76, 179-80, 182, 184, 187, 188
as novice trader, 72, 170, 188
profits of, 170, 175, 188
strategy of, 169, 171-88,299,303,304,305,312,
314, 316,317, 318
Miramar Asset Management, 76, 85-89, 93
Molecular Simulations Inc., 259
money managers, 144-45, 176, 200-202, 205, 214,
226, 234, 235
Morgan Stanley, 256, 263
multiple regression, 1 30
mutual funds, 34-36, 40, 55, 82, 189-206, 207, 214
Nasdaq, 75, 110, 158
Network Associates, 89-90
Newman, Bill, 58
New Yorker, 229
New York Post, 278
New York Stock Exchange, 107,312
Nintendo, 276
Novell, 22
OEX, 84
oil prices, 81
Okumus, Ahmet, 148-68
background, 148-49, 160-61
fund managed by, 149, 153, 162-63
losses of, 149-53, 167
as novice trader, 148-49, 153-57
profits of, 155-56, 162
strategy of, 155-68, 306, 308, 309-10, 318, 319,
325
Okumus Opportunity Fund, 148, 153, 162-63
Olympics, 288, 289-90, 291, 297, 310
Olympic Sports Medicine Committee, U.S., 288,
289-90
One Vf on Wall Street (Lynch), 66-67, 1 57
Oppenheimer & Co., 32
options:
bid/ask differentials for, 134-35
box spread for, 134
call, 101-2, 103, 108-9, 113, 124, 150-51, 325,
327, 328, 329
cumulative tick indicator for, 107-11,114
exercised, 103, 151n, 159, 325, 327, 328
expiration of, 121-22, 151,313, 329-30
index, 140
"in the money" vs. "out of the money," 150-51, 325,
329
intrinsic value of, 329-30
market for, 224-25, 230, 231-32, 325, 327-28,
329
models for, 131-35, 221, 227-34, 312
over-the-counter, 140
premiums on, 101, 102, 103, 140, 159, 160, 325,
.327, 328, 329, 330
pricing of, 221, 226-27, 229-30, 234, 236-38, 270,
325, 327-28, 329
primer on, 95re, 150n, 221n, 327-30
probability curve for, 221, 227-34, 236-37
put, 84, 85, 102, 110, 116, 118, 159-60, 325, 327,
328, 329
risk of, 101, 109-10, 112, 138-40,328
strike price for, 151, 159, 160, 167, 327-28, 329,
330
volatility of, 330
out-of-the-money calls, 150-51, 325, 329
"overfitting the data," 270
overhead, 24
pairs trading, 256-57
Pairs Trading: Performance- of a Relative Value Arbitrage
Rule (Gatev, Goetzmann, and Rouwenhort), 256n
parallel processors, 258-63
Pearle Vision, 242
Pegasystems, 91
Peil, Tom, 208
Pfizer, 130
Philadelphia Stock Exchange, 225, 226, 233
phone cards, 146
pig-at-the-trough approach, 58, 73
PIMCO, 144
Playboy Club, 99-100
"point of smooth sailing," 182
Pokemon, 276-77
poker, 177, 178, 202, 225
portfolios:
insurance for, 320—21
management of, 78-81, 82
risk of, 306, 322-23
theory of, 211-12
positions, trading:
covering of, 85-88, 103, 106, 142-46
disclosure of, 49-50
exposure of, 59, 64, 92-93, 106, 133, 164, 269
liquidation of, 16-17, 25, 46-47, 63, 64, 70, 73,
109, 114-15, 161-62, 167, 185, 217, 219-20,
236, 279-81, 308, 309, 314, 317
long, 15, 19-20, 31, 41^12, 46, 55, 63-64, 68,
80-81, 83, 90, 92, 93, 94, 153-54, 164, 178,
197,217,269,323,324
short, 12-13, 18-19, 24, 36, 38, 40, 44-52, 63-68,
75-94, 103, 108, 112, 149-54, 164, 204, 209,
216-17, 269, 276-81, 285, 293, 306, 315,
321-25
President's Committee of Advisors on Science and
Technology, 259
"price action sandwich," 179
price/earnings ratio, 21, 22, 43-44, 52, 58, 59, 60, 62,
65,66, 72-73,79, 81, 89,92,94, 149, 152,
154-55, 158, 164, 165, 166-67, 172,216,306,
320,321,325
prices, stock:
aggregate, 248
book value vs., 44
cash flow vs., 44
discrepancies in, 254, 257-58
earnings vs., 21, 22, 43-44, 52, 58, 59, 60, 62, 65,
66, 72-73, 79, 81, 89, 92, 94, 149, 152, 154-55,
158, 164, 165, 166-67, 172, 216, 306, 320, 321,
325
entry and exit, 157-58, 162-63, 171, 217, 220,
231,232,257,305,308
recovery of, 25-26, 44
relative, 42, 51, 81, 1 72-73, 311
run-ups of, 17, 35-40, 43-44, 229, 277, 325
sales vs., 44
target, 157-58, 161-64, 177-80, 183,257
trends in, xiii, 24, 45, 85-86, 89-90, 138-39,
155-56, 158,171, 178-84, 212, 216, 254,
278-79
Prime Computer, 37-38
private market value, 44
probability curve, 221, 227-34, 236-37
products, 63, 65, 68-69
profit:
locked-in, 255
margin of, 45, 154-55, 165, 229, 299
probable, 255
reinvestment of, 25
risk vs., 70-71, 76, 125, 127, 128-29, 132, 134-35,
166, 207, 222, 237, 249-50, 255, 265, 269, 299,
323, 326
sources of, xiii
target, 308
proprietary structures, 243
Psychology of Mastering the Markets, The (Kiev), 288
Quantech Fund, LP, 170
Quantech Research Group, 170
Quantum fund, 222
quarterly earnings report, 40, 60, 62-63, 84, 138-39,
141,215-17,286-87
Ranieri, Lewis, 249
ratios:
capitalization/revenue, 36-37, 45, 52
debt/cash flow, 43
price/book value, 44
price/cash flow, 44
price/earnings, 21, 22, 43-44, 52, 58, 59, 60, 62,
65, 66, 72-73, 79, 81, 89, 92, 94, 149, 152,
154-55, 158, 164, 165, 166-67, 172, 216, 306,
320,321,325
price/sales, 44
return/risk, 70-71, 76, 125, 127, 128-29, 132,
134-35, 166, 207, 222, 237, 249-50, 255, 265,
269, 299, 323, 326
Rattner, Steve, 142-43
RCA, 229
real estate, 64
receivables, 91-92, 94, 324


--- PAGE 176 ---
Reindeer Capital, 1-3
religion, 208
replacement value, 248
research:
brokerage, 55-56, 61-62
computer, 77, 81, 129-30, 157-58, 181, 194-95,
197, 202-3, 204, 208, 215, 255, 274, 319
consumer, 67-69
hypotheses in, 256, 265, 270, 274, 319
necessity of, xiii, 50, 59-60, 65-66, 100, 154-55,
160, 166, 189-90
reliability of, 25-26, 41,45, 55-56, 165, 176-77,
185, 187,231,326
sell-side, 61-62, 64, 65-66, 72, 73, 143
technical, 190, 193, 194-95, 202-3, 206, 228-29,
254-74, 320
research and development (R£D), 89
Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC), 249-50
restructuring, 45-46
revenue, 65, 90, 92, 139
capitalization vs., 36-37, 45, 52
reverse franchising, 242
risk:
exposure to, 59, 64, 92-93, 106, 1.33, 164, 269
of index funds, 34-37, 50, 53
"just-say-no," 244-45
management of, xiii, 30, 33, 54-55, 59, 63, 71-72,
73,87-88,93, 139, 145-46, 147, 166, 167, 177,
189,222,255,269,297,305-6
of options, 101, 109-10, 1 12, 138-40, 328
portfolio, 306, 322-23
profit vs., 70-71, 76, 125, 127, 128-29, 132,
134-35, 166, 207, 222, 237, 249-50, 255, 265,
269, 299, 323, 326
reduction of, 44, 46-47, 76, 254, 316,
322-23
unlimited, 1 64, 280, 323-24
unsystematic (company specific), 21 1-12
roulette, 255-56
Rouwcnhort, K. Geert, 256n
Russell 2000, 30, 33, 35
Russia, 18,64,231-32
S.A.C., 275, 288, 290-93
sales, brokerage:
cold-calling for, 12, 56, 212-13
pitch for, 20-21, 48, 56, 59, 190-91, 212
sales, company, 44, 90
Salomon Brothers, 246-48, 249
Sambo's restaurants, 100, 101
Sanchez Computer Associates, 86-88
S&P500, 30, 31,34, 35-36, 52, 110-11, 113,
144-45, 149, 162-63, 196, 200, 235, 285
Scholcs, Myron, 271
Schrodinger, Inc., 259
Schwab, 149-52, 164
Schwager, Jo Ann, xi-xii
I N D E X
Schwartz, Eddie, 98-99
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 39, 72,
80,89,235,251
Seinfeld, 276
Shaw, David, 254-74
background of, 258—63
fund managed by, 254, 255. 257-58, 259, 272, 273,
304
profits of, 254, 255
strategy of, 19, 254-74, 301, 303, 304, 306, 320
Shearson Lehman Brothers, 191-92
"sheet monkeys," 233
shopping malls, 67—68
short selling; see positions, trading, short
slippage, 203
Social Psychiatry Research Institute, 288
software, computer, 26, 86-88, 90, 139, 215
speculation, 20, 84-85, 177, 225-26
statistical arbitrage, 255—56
stockbrokers, 20-21, 56, 100, 207, 212-14
sec also sales, brokerage
stock market:
anomalies of, 254, 265-69
bear, 92-93, 152-53, 162, 237, 255
bull, 64, 75-76, 88, 92, 108, 162, 165, 183, 237,
255,284
corrections in, 16, 232
as efficient, 42, 50-51, 131-33, 147, 161,217,
264, 265-69, 270, 320,328
environment of, 25, 29, 33, 38, 41, 47-48, 176,
300
forecasts of, 196, 269, 310-11
indexes of, 30, 31, 34-36, i 40; see also specific
indexes
misconceptions about, 27, 185-86
as random, 8, 228-29, 238, 274
trends in, 17-19, 29, 50-51, 52, 75-76, 77,92-93,
107, 115-16, 131-32, 151-52, 164, 165,257,
270,281-82,308-9
stock market crash (1987), 47-48, 56, 108, 135, 237,
320-21
Slock Market Logic (Fosback), 156-57
stock market wizards, see traders
stocks:
"blessed," 15-17, 318
breakouts of, 183
capitalization of, see capitalization
certificates for, 69-70
cyclical, 81
discounts on, 140-41, 157,213,250-52,253,
315
dividends from, 13, 133, 140^41
fundamentals of, 15, 18, 62, 70, 79, 87, 92, 147,
152, 155, 161, 162-63, 165, 166, 180-82,
268-69,274, 281, 311, 320
over-the-counter, 77, 140, 235
preferred, 243
I N D E X
prices of, sag prices, stuck
privately held. 84-85
quality, 20, 111
relative linearity ol, 15
repurchase of, 1 7, 43, 45, 5 1, 162
response of, 15-16, 18,26,40-41,47-48,81,
235-36, 318
restricted, 250-52
screening of, 42-46, 51-52, 59-63, 72-74, 89-94,
166-68, 171, 172-73, 187
technology, 64, 90-91, 92, 118, 151, 162, 186,
229-30,249,269,310-11
tips on, 6, 13-14,20,25,72, 173, 176, 312
valuation of, 17, 45, 46-47, 58, 64, 67, 81, 83,
85-86,89-91, 152, 157, 160, 162-63,229-30,
256-57, 306-7, 322
volatility of, 102, 108, 115, 153, 197,330
stop-loss points. 162-63, 217, 220, 231, 232, 305,
308
Strategy for Daily Living, A (Kiev), 289
Sjrperper/ormtiMce Sfocfa (Love), !71
supply and demand, 50
Susquehanna, 233
takeovers, 103, 105
taxes, 35, 109, 133, 134-35, 200
T-bill rate, 1 34
Tektronix, 37, 42, 45-46
Teledyne, 10!
"ten-bagger," i61
Thailand, 18
Thermolase, 46-47
ThcSlreet.com, 218
Thorpe, Ed, 266
3Com, 22
lick indicators, 107-1 1, 114, 312, 322
Time, 277
timc-and-sales log, 80
lips, stock, 6, 13-14, 20, 25, 72, 173, 176, 312
Tokyo Stock Exchange, 223
traders:
athletes compared with, 285, 288, 289-90, 291,
297, 310
author's previous works on, 30, 77, I 70, 189, 197,
214-15,233
black, 127-28, 136-38
competitive edge of, 61-62, 144-45, 172, 177,203,
217-18, 225-26, 255-56, 301-2
conviction of, 27, 37-38, 48-49, 51, 52, 55, 57,
120-21, 126, 152, 167, 171, 174, 288-97, 302-3
decision-making by, 6, 13-14, 20. 21-22, 23, 25,
72,78, 173, 176,312,318
determination of, 28, 29, 31, 54, 125. 174-75,
186-87, 194, 203-4, 205, 208, 283-84,299,
303^1
discipline of, 72, 166, 167-68, 177, 186, 187, 202,
205, 208, 209, 292, 298
experience of, 28, 1 19-22. 195, 254-55, 300, 304,
308,314,317-18
fees of, 35, 55.275
flexibility of, 188,299-300
independence of, 22-23, 26-27, 57-58, 60-61, 93,
119-21,254-55,301,316, 326
instincts of, 5, 16, 27, 28, 71-72, 186, 188,
278-79, 286-87
lessons from, 298-326
novice, 67, 72,93-94. 183-86, 204, 218-19,
286-87, 308
patience of, 167-68, 176, 309-10
personality of, 29, 281, 285, 288-97, 298-99,
312-13, 314
style of, 183-84,2)8-20,281-83,
286-87
in teams, 282-83
whole-picture perspective of, xiii-xiv
women, 77, 88-89
see also specific trailers
trading:
as art vs. science, 61, 7i—72
"bond ratio," 110-11
capitalization for, 10, 114-19, 120. 142, 146, 147,
205, 207, 222, 303
"catapult," 110
charts for, 158, 181-83, 264-74
complexity of, 315—16
contests for, 97, 111, 118, 170
currency, 5, 9, 202-3
equity, 6, 144-45,257
fixed-income, 271
goals For, 296,297, 310
high-probability. 110, 116. 177. 178,216-17.219,
255-56,307,316
leveraged, 47-48, 69-70, I 17, 174, 204, 222,
314-15
losses capped in, 179-80, 184, 187, 188
paper, 175
positions in, see positions, trading
post-trade analysis of, 97, 109-10, 179-80, 185,
187-88, 218, 219, 300-301,314
research for, see research
restrictions on, 21-22, 27-28, 81, 118-22, 152-53,
166, 179-80
systems of, 169, 171-82, 189-206, 264-74
timing in, xiii, 85, 157-58, 162-63, 171, 185, 196,
217, 220, 231, 232, 239, 257, 284-85, 305,
308
unethical, 79-80, 84, 234-35
as vocation, 119-21,316
Trading in the "Lane (Kiev), 288-89
Trading Places, 277
Trading to Win (Kiev), 288
transaction costs, 134-35, 255
turbo indexing, 34
TV set-type adjustments, 233-34


--- PAGE 177 ---
I N D E X
Ultrafem, 69
U.S. Investing Championship, 111, 118, 170
U.S. Olympic Sports Medicine Committee, 288,
289-90
utilities, public, 55-56, 118
Value Line, 185
venture capital, 10, 205, 207, 222, 303
Viasoft, 163
Vinik, Jeff, 67
volatility, 102, 108, 115, 153, 197, 330
Volpe, Welly & Co., 11-12
"von Neumann bottleneck," 260-61
Wall Street Journal, 55, 182, 189, 200, 276
Walton, Stuart, 1-29
background of, 1-6, 9-11
fund managed by, 1, 14-29
losses of, 6, 10, 12-14,20,22,317-18
as novice trader, 3-15, 20, 22, 24-29
profits of, 1,23-24
strategy of, 8, 15-29,299, 300, 312-13, 316-17,
318
Walton, William Gladstone "Reindeer," 2-3
Watson, Steve, 54-74
background of, 54, 55, 63, 71
fund managed by, 54-55, 58-60, 70-71, 73-74
as novice trader, 54—59, 72
strategy of, 54-55, 59-74, 302, 304, 306, 308, 313,
318,324,326
What Works on Wall Street (O'Shaughnessy),
199-200
When to Sell Stocks (Mammis), 209
Windmere, 62—63
Wolk, Elliot, 131, 135,305
Wood Gundy, 6-9
Yahoo, 282, 323
